Christoph Schiller
MOTION MOUNTAIN
the adventure of physics – vol.iv
the quantum of change
www.motionmountain.net

Christoph Schiller
Motion Mountain
The Adventure of Physics
Volume IV
The Quantum of Change
Edition 25.40, available as free pdf at
www.motionmountain.net
Editio vicesima quinta.
Proprietas scriptoris © Chrestophori Schiller
secundo anno Olympiadis trigesimae.
Omnia proprietatis iura reservantur et vindicantur.
Imitatio prohibita sine auctoris permissione.
Non licet pecuniam expetere pro aliqua, quae
partem horum verborum continet; liber
pro omnibus semper gratuitus erat et manet.
Twenty-fifth edition.
Copyright © 2012 by Christoph Schiller,
the second year of the 30th Olympiad.
This pdf file is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-No DerivativeWorks 3.0 Germany
Licence, whose full text can be found on thewebsite
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/de,
with the additional restriction that reproduction, distribution and use,
in whole or in part, in any product or service, be it
commercial or not, is not allowed without the written consent of
the copyright owner.The pdf file was and remains free for everybody
to read, store and print for personal use, and to distribute
electronically, but only in unmodified form and at no charge.
To Britta, Esther and Justus Aaron
τῷ ἐμοὶ δαὶμονι
Die Menschen stärken, die Sachen klären.
PREFACE
“Primum movere, deinde docere.* Antiquity”
This book is written for anybody who is curious about nature and motion. Have you ever
asked: Why do people, animals, things, images and space move? The answer leads to
many adventures; this volume presents those due to the discovery that there is a smallest
change value in nature. This smallest change value, the quantumof action, leads towhat is
called quantum physics. In the structure of modern physics, shown in Figure 1, quantum
physics covers three points; this volume covers the introduction to the point in the lower
right: the foundations of quantum theory.
The present introduction to quantum physics arose from a threefold aim I have pursued
since 1990: to present the basics of motion in a way that is simple, up to date and
captivating.
In order to be simple, the text focuses on concepts, while keeping mathematics to the
necessary minimum. Understanding the concepts of physics is given precedence over
using formulae in calculations.The whole text is within the reach of an undergraduate.
In order to be up to date, the text is enriched by themany gems – both theoretical and
empirical – that are scattered throughout the scientific literature.
In order to be captivating, the text tries to startle the reader as much as possible. Reading
a book on general physics should be like going to a magic show. We watch, we are
astonished, we do not believe our eyes, we think, and finally we understand the trick.
When we look at nature, we often have the same experience. Indeed, every page presents
at least one surprise or provocation for the reader to think about. Numerous interesting
challenges are proposed.
The motto of the text, dieMenschen stärken, die Sachen klären, a famous statement by
Hartmut von Hentig on pedagogy, translates as: ‘To fortify people, to clarify things.’ Clarifying
things – and adhering only to the truth – requires courage, as changing the habits
of thought produces fear, often hidden by anger. But by overcoming our fears we grow
in strength. And we experience intense and beautiful emotions. All great adventures in
life allow this, and exploring motion is one of them. Enjoy it!
Munich, 18 May 2013.
* ‘First move, then teach.’ In modern languages, the mentioned type of moving (the heart) is called motivating;
both terms go back to the same Latin root.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
8 preface
Galilean physics, heat and electricity
Adventures: sport, music, sailing, cooking,
describing beauty and understanding its origin
(vol. I), using electricity, light and computers,
understanding the brain and people (vol. III).
Special relativity
Adventures: light,
magnetism, length
contraction, time
dilation and
E0 = mc2 (vol. II).
Quantum theory
Adventures: death,
reproduction, biology,
chemistry, evolution,
enjoying colours and
art, all high-tech
business, medicine
(vol. IV and V).
Quantum
theory with gravity
Adventures: bouncing
neutrons, understanding
tree
growth (vol. V).
Final, unified description of
motion
Adventures: understanding
motion, intense joy with
thinking, calculating
couplings and
masses, catching
a glimpse
of bliss
(vol. VI).
G c h, e, k
PHYSICS:
Describing motion
with the least action principle.
Quantum field theory
Adventures: building
accelerators, understanding
quarks, stars,
bombs and the basis of
life, matter, radiation
(vol. V).
How do
everyday,
fast and large
things move?
How do small
things move?
What are things?
Why does motion
occur? What are
space, time and
quantum particles?
General relativity
Adventures: the
night sky, measuring
curved space,
exploring black
holes and the
universe, space
and time (vol. II).
Classical gravity
Adventures:
climbing, skiing,
space travel,
the wonders of
astronomy and
geology (vol. I).
FIGURE 1 A complete map of physics: the connections are defined by the speed of light c, the
gravitational constant G, the Planck constant h, the Boltzmann constant k and the elementary charge e.
Advice for learners
Learning should be fast and fun.The most inefficient and most tedious learning method
is to use a marker to underline text: it wastes time, provides false comfort and makes the
text unreadable. Nobody marking text is learning efficiently or is enjoying it.
In my experience as a student and teacher, one learning method never failed to transform
unsuccessful pupils into successful ones: if you read a book for study, summarize
every section you read, in your own words and images, aloud. If you are unable to do
so, read the section again. Repeat this until you can clearly summarize what you read
in your own words and images, aloud. You can do this alone or with friends, in a room
or while walking. If you do this with everything you read, you will reduce your learning
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
preface 9
and reading time significantly, enjoy learning from good texts much more and hate bad
texts much less. Masters of the method can use it even while listening to a lecture, in a
low voice, thus avoiding to ever take notes.
Advice for teachers
A teacher likes pupils and likes to lead them into exploring the field he chose. His or her
enthusiasm for the job is the key to job satisfaction. If you are a teacher, before the start
of a lesson, picture, feel and tell yourself your how you enjoy the topic of the lesson; then
picture, feel and tell yourself how you will lead each of your pupils into enjoying that
topic as much as you do. Do this exercise consciously, every time. You will minimize
trouble in your class and maximize your success.
This book is not written with exams in mind; it is written to make teachers and students
understand and enjoy physics, the science of motion.
Using this book
Text in green, as found in many marginal notes, marks a link that can be clicked in a pdf
reader. Such green links are either bibliographic references, footnotes, cross references
to other pages, challenge solutions, or pointers to websites.
Solutions and hints for challenges are given in the appendix. Challenges are classified
as research level (r), difficult (d), standard student level (s) and easy (e). Challenges for
which no solution has yet been included in the book are marked (ny).
Feedback and support
This text is and will remain free to download from the internet. I would be delighted to
receive an email fromyou at fb@motionmountain.net, especially on the following issues:
— What was unclear Challenge 1 s and should be improved?
— What story, topic, riddle, picture or movie did you miss?
— What should be corrected?
In order to simplify annotations, the pdf file allows adding yellow sticker notes in Adobe
Reader. Help on the specific points listed on the www.motionmountain.net/help.html
web page would be particularly welcome. All feedback will be used to improve the next
edition. On behalf of all readers, thank you in advance for your input. For a particularly
useful contribution you will be mentioned – if you want – in the acknowledgements,
receive a reward, or both.
Your donation to the charitable, tax-exempt non-profit organisation that produces,
translates and publishes this book series is welcome! For details, see the web page www.
motionmountain.net/donation.html. If you want, your name will be included in the
sponsor list.Thank you in advance for your help, on behalf of all readers across the world.
The paper edition of this book, printed on demand and delivered by mail to any address
of your choice, can be ordered at www.lulu.com/spotlight/motionmountain. But
above all, enjoy the reading!
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
10 preface
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
Contents
15 1 Minimum action – quantum theory for poets
The effects of the quantumof action on rest 18 • The consequences of the quantum
of action for objects 19 • Why ‘quantum’? 21 • The effect of the quantumof action
on motion 23 • The surprises of the quantum of action 25 • Transformation, life
and Democritus 27 • Randomness – a consequence of the quantum of action 30 •
Waves – a consequence of the quantum of action 32 • Particles – a consequence of
the quantum of action 33 • Quantum information 34 • Curiosities and fun challenges
about the quantum of action 35 • The dangers of buying a can of beans 36
• A summary: quantum physics, the law and indoctrination 37
39 2 Light – the strange consequences of the quantum of action
How do faint lamps behave? 39 • Photons 43 • What is light? 45 • The size
of photons 46 • Are photons countable? – Squeezed light 46 • The positions
of photons 48 • Are photons necessary? 51 • Interference: how can a wave be
made up of particles? 53 • Interference of a single photon 55 • Reflection
and diffraction deduced from photon arrows 56 • Refraction and partial reflection
from photon arrows 58 • Fromphotons towaves 58 • Can lightmove faster than
light? – Virtual photons 59 • Indeterminacy of electric fields 60 • Curiosities and
fun challenges about photons 61 • A summary on light: particle and wave 63
65 3 Motion of matter – beyond classical physics
Wine glasses, pencils and atoms – no rest 65 • No infinite precision 66 • Cool
gas 66 • Flows and the quantization of matter 67 • Fluid flows and quantons
67 • Knocking tables and quantized conductivity 67 • Matter quantons and
their motion – matter waves 70 • Mass and acceleration of quantons 71 • Why
are atoms not flat? Why do shapes exist? 72 • Rotation, quantization of angular
momentum, and the lack of north poles 73 • Rotation of quantons 75 • Silver,
Stern and Gerlach – polarization of quantons 76 • Curiosities and fun challenges
about quantum matter 77 • First summary on themotion of quantum particles 78
79 4 The quantum description of matter and its motion
States and measurements 79 • Visualizing the wave function: rotating arrows and
probability clouds 81 •The state evolution – the Schrödinger equation 83 • Selfinterference
of quantons 85 •The speed of quantons 85 • Dispersion of quantons
85 • Tunnelling and limits on memory – damping of quantons 86 • The
quantum phase 88 • Can two photons interfere? 92 • Can two electron beams
interfere? Are there coherent electron beams? 93 • The least action principle in
quantum physics 94 • The motion of quantons with spin 96 • Relativistic wave
equations 97 • Composite vs. elementary quantons 99 • Curiosities and fun challenges
about quantum motion of matter 100 • A summary on motion of quantons
102
103 5 Permutation of particles – are particles like gloves?
Distinguishing macroscopic objects 103 • Distinguishing atoms 104 • Why
does indistinguishability appear in nature? 105 • Can quantum particles be
counted? 106 • What is permutation symmetry? 107 • Indistinguishability and
wave function symmetry 108 • The behaviour of photons 109 • Bunching and
antibunching 110 • The energy dependence of permutation symmetry 110 • Indistinguishability
in quantum field theory 111 • How accurately is permutation
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
12 contents
symmetry verified? 112 • Copies, clones and gloves 113 • Summary 114
115 6 Rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
Quantum particles and symmetry 115 • Types of quantum particles 117 • Spin
1/2 and tethered objects 119 • The extension of the belt trick 123 • Angels, Pauli’s
exclusion principle and the hardness of matter 125 • Is spin a rotation about an
axis? 127 • Rotation requires antiparticles 128 • Why is fencing with laser beams
impossible? 129 • Spin, statistics and composition 129 • A summary on spin and
indistinguishability 130 • Limits and open questions of quantum statistics 131
132 7 Superpositions and probabilities – quantum theory without ideology
Why are people either dead or alive? 132 • Macroscopic superpositions, coherence
and incoherence 133 • Decoherence is due to baths 134 • How baths lead to decoherence
– scattering 135 • How baths lead to decoherence – relaxation 137 •
Summary on decoherence, life and death 139 • What is a system? What is an object?
139 • Is quantum theory non-local? Abit about the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen
paradox 141 • Curiosities and fun challenges about superpositions 144 • Whydo
probabilities and wave function collapse appear in measurements? 146 • Why is
ħ necessary for probabilities? 151 • Hidden variables 151 • Summary on probabilities
and determinism 153 • What is the difference between space and time? 156
• Are we good observers? 156 • What relates information theory, cryptology and
quantum theory? 157 • Is the universe a computer? 157 • Does the universe have
a wave function? And initial conditions? 158
160 8 Colours and other interactions between light and matter
The causes of colour 160 • Using the rainbow to determine what stars are made
of 169 • What determines the colours of atoms? 170 • The size of atoms 173 •
Relativistic hydrogen 175 • Relativistic wave equations – again 176 • Getting a
first feeling for the Dirac equation 178 • Antimatter 179 • Virtual particles 180 •
Curiosities and fun challenges about colour 181 • Material properties 182 • The
strength of electromagnetism 183 • A summary on colours and materials 184
185 9 Quantum physics in a nutshell
Physical results of quantum theory 185 • Results on motion of quantum particles
186 • Achievements in accuracy and precision 188 • Is quantum theory
magic? 189 • Quantum theory is exact, but can do more 190
191 a Units, measurements and constants
SI units 191 • The meaning of measurement 194 • Planck’s natural units 194 •
Other unit systems 196 • Curiosities and fun challenges about units 197 • Precision
and accuracy of measurements 198 • Limits to precision 200 • Physical
constants 200 • Useful numbers 207
209 b Numbersand vector spaces
Numbers as mathematical structures 209 • Complex numbers 211 • Quaternions
212 • Octonions 218 • Other types of numbers 219 • From vector spaces
to Hilbert spaces 220 • Mathematical curiosities and fun challenges 222
224 Challenge hints and solutions
230 Bibliography
246 Credits
Film credits 247 • Image credits 247
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
contents 13
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
The Quantum of Change
In our quest to understand how things move,
we discover that there is a smallest change value in nature,
implying that motion is fuzzy,
that boxes are never tight,
that matter is composed of elementary units,
and that light and interactions are streams of particles.
The smallest change value explains why antimatter exists,
why particles are unlike gloves,
why copying machines do not exist,
why probabilities are reasonable,
and how all colours in nature are formed.
Cha p t e r 1
MINIMUM ACTION – QUANTUM
THEORY FOR POETS
“Natura [in operationibus suis] non facit saltus.* 15th century”
Climbing Motion Mountain up to this point, we completed three legs. We
ame across Galileo’s mechanics (the description of motion for kids), then
ontinued with Einstein’s relativity (the description of motion for science-fiction
enthusiasts), and finally explored Maxwell’s electrodynamics (the description of motion
for business people).These three classical descriptions of motion are impressive, beautiful
and useful. However, they have a small problem: they are wrong.The reason is simple:
none of them describes life.
Whenever we observe a flower or a butterfly, such as those of Figure 2, we enjoy the
bright colours, the motion, the wild smell, the soft and delicate shape or the fine details
of their symmetries. None of the three classical descriptions of nature can explain any
of these properties; neither do they explain the impression that the flower makes on our
senses. Classical physics can describe certain aspects of the impression, but it cannot
explain their origins. For such an explanation, we need quantum theory. In fact, we will
discover that life and every type of pleasure are examples of quantum motion. Take any
example of a pleasant situation,** such as a beautiful evening sky, a waterfall, a caress
Challenge 2 s or a happy child. Classical physics is not able to explain it: the colours, shapes and sizes
involved remain mysterious.
In the early days of physics, the impossibility to describe life and pleasure was not
seen as a shortcoming, because neither senses nor material properties were thought to
be related to motion – and pleasure was not considered a serious subject of investigation
Vol. I, page 349 for a respectable researcher anyway. However, we have since learned that our senses of
touch, smell and sight are primarily detectors of motion.Without motion, there would be
no senses. Furthermore, all detectors aremade ofmatter. During the exploration on electromagnetism
we began to understand that all properties of matter are due to motions
of charged constituents. Density, stiffness, colour and all other material properties result
Vol. III, page 188 from the electromagnetic behaviour of the Lego bricks of matter: namely, the molecules,
the atoms and the electrons.Thus, the properties of matter are also consequences of moVol.
III, page 202 tion.Moreover,we saw that these tiny constituents are not correctly described by classical
Vol. III, page 129 electrodynamics.We even found that light itself does not behave classically.Therefore the
Ref. 1 * ‘Nature [in its workings] makes no jumps.’
** The photograph on page 14 shows a female glow worm, Lampyris noctiluca, as commonly found in the
United Kingdom (© John Tyler, www.johntyler.co.uk/gwfacts.htm).
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
16 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
FIGURE 2 Examples of quantum machines (© Linda de Volder).
inability of classical physics to describe matter, light and the senses is indeed due to its
intrinsic limitations.
In fact, every failure of classical physics can be traced back to a single, fundamental
Ref. 2 discovery made in 1899 by Max Planck:*
⊳ In nature, action values smaller than ħ = 1.06 ⋅ 10−34 Js are not observed.
All attempts to observe physical actions values smaller than this fail.** In other words,
* Max Planck (1858–1947), professor of physics in Berlin, was a central figure in thermostatics. He discovered
and named the Boltzmann constant k and the quantum of action h, often called Planck’s constant. His
introduction of the quantum hypothesis gave birth to quantum theory. He also made the works of Einstein
known in the physical community, and later organized a job for him in Berlin. He received the Nobel Prize
for physics in 1918. He was an important figure in the German scientific establishment; he also was one of
the very few who had the courage to tell Adolf Hitler face to face that it was a bad idea to fire Jewish professors.
(He got an outburst of anger as answer.) Famously modest, with many tragedies in his personal life,
he was esteemed by everybody who knew him.
** In fact, this story is a slight simplification: the constant originally introduced by Planck was the (unreduced)
constant h = 2πħ. The factor 2π leading to the final quantum principle was found somewhat later,
by other researchers.
This somewhat unconventional, but didactically useful, approach to quantumtheory is due toNiels Bohr.
Ref. 3, Ref. 4 Nowadays, it is hardly ever encountered in the literature, despite its simplicity.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 17
FIGURE 3 Max Planck (1858–1947) FIGURE 4 Niels Bohr
(1885–1962)
in nature – as in a good cinema film – there is always some action. The existence of
a smallest action value – the so-called quantum principle – is in complete contrast with
Challenge 3 s classical physics. (Why?)Despite this contrast, the quantumprinciple has passed an enormous
number of experimental tests, many of which we will encounter in this part of our
mountain ascent. Above all, the quantum principle has never failed even a single test.
The fundamental constant ħ, which is pronounced ‘aitch-bar’, is called the quantum of
action, or alternatively Planck’s constant. Planck discovered the quantum principle when
Vol. III, page 129 studying the properties of incandescent light, i.e., of light emanating from hot bodies.
But the quantum principle also applies to motion of matter, and even, as we will see later,
to motion of space-time.
The quantum principle states that no experiment can measure an action smaller than
ħ. For a long time, Einstein tried to devise experiments to overcome this limit. But he
failed in all his attempts: nature does not allow it, as Bohr showed again and again. We
recall that in physics – as in the theatre – action is a measure for the change occurring in
Vol. I, page 215 a system.The quantum principle can thus rephrased as
⊳ In nature, a change smaller than ħ = 1.06 ⋅ 10−34 Js cannot be observed.
Therefore, a minimum action implies that there is a smallest change value in nature. If we
compare two observations, there will always be change between them.Thus the quantum
of action would perhaps be better named the quantum of change.
Can a minimum change really exist in nature? To accept the idea, we need to explore
three points, detailed in Table 1. We need to show that no smaller change is observed in
nature, that no smaller change can ever be observed, and show that all consequences of
this smallest change, howeverweird theymay be, apply to nature. In fact, this exploration
Niels Bohr (b. 1885 Copenhagen, d. 1962C openhagen) was one of the great figures of modern physics.
A daring thinker and a polite man, he made Copenhagen University into the new centre of development of
quantum theory, overshadowing Göttingen. He developed the description of the atom in terms of quantum
theory, for which he received the 1922 Nobel Prize in Physics. He had to flee Denmark in 1943 after the
German invasion, because of his Jewish background, but returned there after the war, continuing to attract
the best physicists across the world.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
18 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
TABLE 1 How to convince yourself and others that there is a minimum
action, or minimum change ħ in nature. Compare this table with the two
tables in volume II, that about maximum speed on page 24, and that
about maximum force on page 100.
I s s u e Me t h o d
The action value ħ is
observer-invariant
check all observations
Local change or action values < ħ
are not observed
check all observations
Change or action values < ħ are
either non-local or not due to
energy transport
check all observations
Local change or action values < ħ
cannot be produced
check all attempts
Local change or action values < ħ
cannot be imagined
solve all paradoxes
A smallest local change or action
value ħ is consistent
1 – show that all
consequences, however
weird, are confirmed by
observation
2 – deduce quantum theory
from it and check it
constitutes all of quantumphysics.Therefore, these checks are all we do in the remaining
of this part of our adventure. But before we explore some of the experiments that confirm
the existence of a smallest change, we directly present some of its more surprising
consequences.
The effects of the quantum of action on rest
Since action is a measure of change, a minimum observable action means that two successive
observations of the same system always differ by at least ħ. In every system, there
is always something happening. As a consequence we find:
⊳ In nature there is no rest.
Everything moves, all the Page 15 time, at least a little bit. Natura facit saltus.* True, these jumps
are tiny, as ħ is too small to be observable by any of our senses. Nevertheless, rest can be
observed only macroscopically, and only as a long-time or many-particle average.
The quantum of action implies that in amountain – an archetypal ‘system at rest’ – all
the atoms and electrons are continually buzzing around. In short, there is motion inside
matter.
Since there is a minimum action for all observers, and since there is no rest, we deduce:
* ‘Naturemakes jumps.’
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 19
⊳ In nature there is no perfectly straight or perfectly uniform motion.
Forget all you have learnt so far: Inertial motion is an approximation! An object can
move in straight, uniformmotion only approximately, and only when observed over long
distances or long times. We will see later that the more massive the object is, the better
the approximation Challenge 4 s is. (Can you confirm this?) So macroscopic observers can still talk
about space-time symmetries; and special relativity can thus be reconciled with quantum
theory.
Also free fall, or motion along a geodesic, exists only as a long-time average. So general
relativity, which is based on the existence of freely-falling observers, cannot be correct
when actions of the order of ħ are involved. Indeed, the reconciliation of the quantum
principle with general relativity – and thus with curved space – is a big challenge.
(The solution is simple only for weak, everyday fields.) The issues involved are so mindshattering
that they form a separate, final, part of this mountain ascent.We thus explore
situations without gravity first.
The consequences of the quantum of action for objects
Have you ever wondered why leaves are green? You probably know that they are green
because they absorb blue (short-wavelength) and red (long-wavelength) light, while allowing
green (medium-wavelength) light to be reflected. How can a system filter out the
small and the large, and let the middle pass through? To do so, leaves must somehow
measure the frequency. But we have seen that classical physics does not allow measurement
of time (or length) intervals, as any measurement requires a measurement unit,
Vol. I, page 375 and classical physics does not allow such units to be defined. On the other hand, it takes
only a few lines to confirm that with the help of the quantum of action ħ (and the Boltzmann
constant k, both of which Planck discovered), fundamental units for all measurable
quantities can be defined, including time and therefore frequency. (Can you find
a combination of the speed of light c, the gravitational constant G and the quantum of
Challenge 5 s action ħ that gives a time? It will only take a few minutes.)
Measurements are only possible at all because of the existence of the quantum of action.
⊳ Measurements are quantum effects.
When Planck saw that the quantum of action allowed defining all units in nature, he was
as happy as a child; he knew straight away that he had made a fundamental discovery,
even though (in 1899) quantum theory did not yet exist. He even told his seven-year-old
Ref. 5 son Erwin about it, while walking with him through the woods around Berlin. Planck
explained to his son that he had made a discovery as important as universal gravity. Indeed,
Planck knew that he had found the key to understanding many of the effects that
were then unexplained.
⊳ In nature, all times and all frequencies are due to the quantum of action.
All processes that take time are quantum processes. If you prefer, waiting is a quantum
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
20 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
effect! In particular, without the quantum of action, oscillations and waves could not
exist:
⊳ Every colour is a quantum effect.
But this* is not all.
Planck also realized that the quantum of action allows us to understand the size of all
things.
⊳ Every size is a quantum effect.
Can you find the combination Challenge 7 e of c, G and ħ that yields a length? With the quantum of
action, it was finally possible to determine the maximum size of mountains, of trees and
Vol. I, page 291 of humans. Planck knew that the quantum of action confirmed what Galileo had already
deduced long before him: that sizes are due to fundamental, smallest scales in nature.
The size of objects is related to the size of atoms. In turn, the size of atoms is a direct
consequence of the quantum of action. Can you derive an approximation for the size
of atoms, knowing that it is given by the motion of electrons of mass me and charge e,
Challenge 8 s constrained by the quantumof action?This connection, a simple formula,was discovered
in 1910 by Arthur Erich Haas, 15 years before quantum theory was formulated.
⊳ Atom sizes are quantum effects.
At the time, Haas was widely ridiculed. Nowadays, his formula is found in all textbooks,
Page 173 including this one.**
In determining the size of atoms, the quantum of action has another important consequence:
⊳ Gulliver’s travels are impossible.
There are no tiny people and no giant ones. Classically, nothing speaks against the idea;
Challenge 9 s but the quantum of action prevents it. Can you supply the detailed argument?
But if rest does not exist, how can shapes exist? Any shape of everyday life, including
that of a flower, is the result of body parts remaining at rest with respect to each
other. Now, all shapes result from interactions between the constituents of matter, as
shown most clearly in the shapes of molecules. But how can a molecule, such as the water
molecule H2O, shown in Figure 5, have a shape? In fact, a molecule does not have a
fixed shape, but its shape fluctuates, as would be expected from the quantum of action.
Despite the fluctuations, every molecule does have an average shape, because different
angles and distances correspond to different energies. Again, these average length and
* In fact, it is also possible to define all measurement units in terms of the speed of light c, the gravitational
Challenge 6 s constant G and the electron charge e.Why is this not fully satisfactory?
** Before the discovery of ħ, the only simple length scale for the electron was the combination
e2/(4πε0me c2) ≈ 3 fm; this is ten thousand times smaller than an atom. We also note that any length scale
containing e is a quantumeffect, and not a classical length scale, because e is the quantum of electric charge.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 21
FIGURE 5 An artist’s impression of a water molecule.
FIGURE 6 Max Born (1882–1970)
angle values only exist because the quantum of action yields fundamental length scales
in nature.Without the quantum of action, there would be no shapes in nature.
⊳ All shapes are quantum effects.
All shapes in everyday life are due to molecular shapes, or to their generalizations.
The mass of an object is also a consequence of the quantum of action, as we will see
later on. Since all material properties – such as density, colour, stiffness or polarizability
– are defined as combinations of length, time and mass units, we find:
⊳ All material properties arise from the quantum of action.
In short, the quantum of action determines the size, shape, colour, mass, and all other
properties of objects, from stones to whipped cream.
Why ‘quant um’?
Quantum effects surround us on all sides. However, since the quantum of action is so
small, its effects on motion appear mostly, but not exclusively, in microscopic systems.
The study of such systems was called quantum mechanics by Max Born, one of the major
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
22 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
TABLE 2 Some small systems in motion and the observed action values for their changes.
Sys t e m a n d c ha n g e Ac t i o n Mot i o n
Light
Smallest amount of light absorbed by a coloured surface 1 ħ quantum
Smallest impact when light reflects from mirror 2 ħ quantum
Smallest consciously visible amount of light c. 5 ħ quantum
Smallest amount of light absorbed in flower petal 1 ħ quantum
Blackening of photographic film c. 3 ħ quantum
Photographic flash c. 1017 ħ classical
Electricity
Electron ejected from atom or molecule c. 1–2 ħ quantum
Electron extracted from metal c. 1–2 ħ quantum
Electron motion inside microprocessor c. 2–6 ħ quantum
Signal transport in nerves, from one molecule to the next c. 5 ħ quantum
Current flow in lightning bolt c. 1038 ħ classical
Materials
Tearing apart two neighbouring iron atoms c. 1–2 ħ quantum
Breaking a steel bar c. 1035 ħ classical
Basic process in superconductivity 1 ħ quantum
Basic process in transistors 1 ħ quantum
Basic magnetization process 1 ħ quantum
Chemistry
Atom collision in liquid at room temperature 1 ħ quantum
Shape oscillation of water molecule c. 1 − 5 ħ quantum
Shape change of molecule, e.g. in chemical reaction c. 1 − 5 ħ quantum
Single chemical reaction curling a hair c. 2 − 6 ħ quantum
Tearing apart two mozzarella molecules c. 300 ħ quantum
Smelling one molecule c. 10 ħ quantum
Burning fuel in a cylinder in an average car engine explosion c. 1037 ħ classical
Life
Air molecule hitting eardrum c. 2 ħ quantum
Smallest sound signal detectable by the ear Challenge 10 ny
Single DNA duplication step during cell division c. 100 ħ quantum
Ovule fertilization c. 1014 ħ classical
Smallest step in molecular motor c. 5 ħ quantum
Sperm motion by one cell length c. 1015 ħ classical
Cell division c. 1019 ħ classical
Fruit fly’s wing beat c. 1024 ħ classical
Person walking one body length c. 2 ⋅ 1036 ħ classical
Nuclei and stars
Nuclear fusion reaction in star c. 1 − 5 ħ quantum
Explosion of gamma-ray burster c. 1080 ħ classical
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 23
contributors to the field.* Later, the term quantum theory became more popular.
Quantum theory arises from the existence of smallest measurable values in nature,
generalizing the idea that Galileo had in the seventeenth century. As discussed in detail
Vol. I, page 289 earlier on, it was Galileo’s insistence on ‘piccolissimi quanti’ – smallest quanta – ofmatter
that got him into trouble.We will soon discover that the idea of a smallest change is necessary
for a precise and accurate description ofmatter and of nature as a whole.Therefore
Born adopted Galileo’s term for the new branch of physics and called it ‘Quantentheorie’
or ‘theory of quanta’.The English language adopted the Latin singular ‘quantum’ instead
of the plural used in most other languages.
Note that the term ‘quantum’ does not imply that allmeasurement values are multiples
of a smallest one: this is so only in a few cases.
Quantum theory is the description of microscopic motion. Quantum theory is necessary
whenever a process produces an action value of the order of the quantum of action.
Table 2 shows that all processes on atomic and molecular scales, including biological
and chemical processes, are quantum processes. So do processes of light emission and
absorption.These phenomena can only be described with quantum theory.
Table 2 also shows that the term ‘microscopic’ has a different meaning for a physicist
and for a biologist. For a biologist, a system is ‘microscopic’ if it requires a microscope
for its observation. For a physicist, a system is microscopic if its characteristic action is of
the order of the quantum of action. In other words, for a physicist a system is usually microscopic
if it is not even visible in a (light) microscope. To increase the confusion, some
quantum physicists nowadays call their own class of microscopic systems ‘mesoscopic’,
while others call their systems ‘nanoscopic’. Both terms were introduced only to attract
attention and funding: they are useless.
The effect of the quantum of action on motion
There is another way to characterize the difference between a microscopic, or quantum,
system and a macroscopic, or classical, one. A smallest action implies that the difference
between the action values S of two successive observations of the same system, a time Δt
apart, cannot vanish.We have
|S(t + Δt) − S(t)| = |(E ± ΔE)(t + Δt) − Et| = |EΔt ± tΔE ± ΔEΔt| ⩾ ħ
2
. (1)
*Max Born (b. 1882B reslau, d. 1970 Göttingen) first studied mathematics, then turned to physics. A professor
at Göttingen University, hemade the city one of the world centres of physics. He developed quantum
mechanics with his assistantsWernerHeisenberg and Pascual Jordan, and then applied it to scattering, solidstate
physics, optics and liquids.He was the first to understand that the state function describes a probability
Ref. 6 amplitude. Born andWolf together wrote what is still the main textbook on optics.
Born attracted toGöttingen themost brilliant talents of the time, receiving as visitorsHund, Pauli, Nordheim,
Oppenheimer, Goeppert-Mayer, Condon, Pauling, Fock, Frenkel, Tamm, Dirac, Mott, Klein, Heitler,
London, von Neumann, Teller,Wigner, and dozens of others. Being Jewish, Born lost his job in 1933, when
criminals took over the German government. He emigrated, and became professor in Edinburgh, where he
stayed for 20 years. Physics at Göttingen never recovered from this loss. For his elucidation of the meaning
of the wave function he received the 1954 Nobel Prize in Physics.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
24 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
FIGURE 7 Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976)
The factor 1/2 arises because a smallest action ħ automatically implies an action indeterminacy
of half its value. Now the values of the energy E and time t – but not of (the
positive) ΔE or Δt – can be set to zero if we choose a suitable observer. Thus, the existence
of a quantum of action implies that in any system the evolution is constrained
by
ΔEΔt ⩾ ħ
2
, (2)
where E is the energy of the system and t is its age, so that ΔE is the change of energy
and Δt is the time between two successive observations.
Challenge 11 e By a similar reasoning, we find that for any physical system the position and momentum
are constrained by
ΔxΔp ⩾ ħ
2
, (3)
where Δx is the indeterminacy in position and Δp is the indeterminacy in momentum.
These two famous relations were called indeterminacy relations by their discoverer,
Werner Heisenberg.* In English they are often called ‘uncertainty relations’; however,
this term is incorrect.The quantities are not uncertain, but undetermined. Because of the
quantum of action, system observables have no definite value.There is no way to ascribe
* It is often said that the indeterminacy relation for energy and time has a different weight from that for
momentum and position.This is a wrong idea, propagated by the older generation of physicists, which has
survived through many textbooks for over 70 years. Just forget it. It is essential to remember that all four
quantities appearing in the inequalities describe the internal properties of the system. In particular, t is a
time variable deduced from changes observed inside the system, and not the time coordinatemeasured by
an outside clock; similarly, the position x is not the external space coordinate, but the position characterizRef.
7 ing the system.
Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976) was an important German theoretical physicist and an excellent tabletennis
and tennis player. In 1925, as a young man, he developed, with some help from Max Born and Pascual
Jordan, the first version of quantum theory; from it he deduced the indeterminacy relations. For these
achievements he received the Nobel Prize for physics in 1932. He also worked on nuclear physics and on
turbulence. During the SecondWorldWar, he worked on the German nuclear-fission programme. After the
war, he published several successful books on philosophical questions in physics, slowly turned into a crank,
and tried unsuccessfully –with some half-hearted help fromWolfgang Pauli – to find a unified description
of nature based on quantum theory, the ‘world formula’.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 25
a precise value to momentum, position, or any other observable of a quantum system.
Any system whose indeterminacy is of the order of ħ is a quantum system; if the
indeterminacy product is much larger, the system is classical, and classical physics is
sufficient for its description. So even though classical physics assumes that there are no
measurement indeterminacies in nature, a system is classical only if its indeterminacies
are large compared to the minimum possible ones!
In short, quantum theory is necessary whenever we try to measure some quantity as
precisely as possible. In fact, every measurement is itself a quantum process. And the
indeterminacy relation implies that measurement precision is limited. The quantum of
action shows that motion cannot be observed to infinite precision. In other words, the microscopic
world is fuzzy.This fact has many important consequences and many strange
ones. For example, if motion cannot be observed with infinite precision, the very concept
of motion needs to be handled with great care, as it cannot be applied in certain
situations. In a sense, the rest of our quest is just an exploration of the implications of
this result.
In fact, as long as space-time is flat, it turns out that we can retain the concept of
motion to describe observations, provided we remain aware of the limitations implied
by the quantum principle.
The surprises of the quan tum of action
The quantum of action ħ implies a fuzziness of all motion. This fuzziness also implies
the existence of short-time deviations from energy,momentumand angular-momentum
conservation in microscopic systems. For general assurance it must be stressed that for
long observation times – surely for all times longer than a microsecond – conservation
holds. But in the first Vol. I, page 206 part of our mountain ascent, we realized that any type of nonconservation
implies the existence of surprises in nature.Well, here are some of them.
Since precisely uniform motion does not exist, a system moving in one dimension
only – such as the hand of a clock – always has the possibility of moving a bit in the
opposite direction, thus leading to incorrect readings. Indeed, quantum theory predicts
that clocks have essential limitations:
⊳ Perfect clocks do not exist.
The deep implications of this statement will become clear step by step.
It is also impossible to avoid that an object makes small displacement sideways. In
fact, quantum theory implies that, strictly speaking,
⊳ Neither uniformnor one-dimensionalmotion exists.
Also this statement harbours many additional surprises.
Quantum limitations apply also to metre rules. It is impossible to ensure that the rule
is completely at rest with respect to the object being measured. Thus the quantum of
action implies again, on the one hand, that measurements are possible, and on the other
hand:
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
26 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
⊳ Measurement accuracy is limited.
It also follows from the quantum of action that any inertial or freely-falling observer
must be large, as only large systems approximate inertial motion.
⊳ An observer cannot be microscopic.
If humans were not macroscopic, they could neither observe nor study motion.
Because of the finite accuracy with which microscopicmotion can be observed, fasterthan-
light motion is possible in the microscopic domain! Quantum theory thus predicts
tachyons, at least over short time intervals. For the same reason,
⊳ Motion backwards in time is possible over microscopic times and distances.
In short, a quantum of action implies the existence of microscopic time travel. However,
this remains impossible in the macroscopic domain, such as everyday life.
But there is more. Imagine a moving car suddenly disappearing for good. In such
a situation, neither momentum nor energy would be conserved. The action change for
such a disappearance is large compared to ħ, so that its observation would contradict
even classical physics Challenge 12 s – as you may wish to check. However, the quantum of action allows
a microscopic particle, such as an electron, to disappear for a short time, provided it
reappears afterwards.
⊳ The quantum of action implies that there is no permanence in nature.
The quantum of action also implies:
⊳ The vacuum is not empty.
If one looks at empty space twice, the two observations being separated by a tiny time interval,
some energy will be observed the second time. If the time interval is short enough,
then because of the quantum of action, matter particles will be observed. Indeed, particles
can appear anywhere from nowhere, and disappear just afterwards: the action limit
requires it. In summary, nature exhibits short-term appearance and disappearance of
matter. In other words, the classical idea of an empty vacuum is correct only when the
vacuum is observed over a long time.
The quantum of action implies that compass needles cannot work. If we look twice in
quick succession at a compass needle, or even at a house, we usually observe that it stays
oriented in the same direction. But since physical action has the same dimensions as
Challenge 13 e angular momentum, a minimum value for action implies a minimum value for angular
momentum. Even a macroscopic object has a minimum value for its rotation. In other
words, quantum theory predicts
⊳ Everything rotates.
An object can be non-rotating only approximately, when observations are separated by
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 27
p
E
m
0 Δx F IGURE 8 Hills are never high
enough.
long time intervals.
Formicroscopic systems, the quantumlimits on rotation have specific effects. If the rotation
angle can be observed – as for molecules – the system behaves like a macroscopic
object: its position and orientation are fuzzy. But for a system whose rotation angle cannot
be observed, the quantum of action limits the angular momentum to multiples of
ħ/2. In particular, all microscopic bound systems – such as molecules, atoms, or nuclei
– contain rotational motion and rotating components.
Transformation, life and Democritus
At the beginning of our adventure, we mentioned that the Greeks distinguished three
Vol. I, page 20 types of changes: transport, growth, and transformation. We also mentioned that Democritus
had deduced that all these types of changes – including life and death – were in
fact the same, and due to themotion of atoms.The quantumof actionmakes exactly this
point.
First of all, a minimumaction implies that cages in zoos are dangerous and banks are
not safe. A cage is a feature that needs a lot of energy to overcome. Physically speaking,
the wall of a cage is an energy hill, resembling the real hill shown in Figure 8. Imagine
that a particle with momentum p approaches one side of the hill, which is assumed to
have width Δx.
In everyday life – and thus in classical physics – the particle will never be observed
on the other side of the hill if its kinetic energy p2/2m is less than the height E of the
hill. But imagine that the missing momentum to overcome the hill, Δp = 󵀂2mE − p,
satisfies ΔxΔp ⩽ ħ/2.The particle will have the possibility to overcome the hill, despite
its insufficient energy. The quantum of action thus implies that a hill of width
Δx ⩽ ħ/2
󵀂2mE − p
(4)
is not an obstacle to a particle ofmass m. But this is not all. Since the value of the particle
momentum p is itself uncertain, a particle can overcome the hill even if the hill is wider
than the value (4) – although the broader it is, the lower the probability will be. So any
particle can overcome any obstacle.This is called the tunnelling effect, for obvious reasons.
Classically, tunnelling is impossible. In quantum theory, the feat is possible, because the
Page 81 wave function does not vanish at the location of the hill; sloppily speaking, the wave
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
28 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
m E2
E1
FIGURE 9 Leaving enclosures.
function is non-zero inside the hill. It thus will be also non-zero behind the hill. As a
result, quantum systems can penetrate or ‘tunnel’ through hills.
In short, theminimum-action principle implies that there are no tight boxes in nature.
Thanks to the tunnelling effect,
⊳ Matter is not impenetrable.
The penetrability of all matter is in contrast to everyday, classical observation. Can you
explain why lion cages work Challenge 14 s despite the quantum of action?
By the way, the quantum of action also implies that a particle with a kinetic energy
greater than the energy height of a hill can be reflected by the hill. Also this effect is
impossible in classical physics.
The minimum-action principle also implies that bookshelves are dangerous. Why?
Shelves are obstacles to motion. A book on a shelf is in the same situation as themass in
Figure 9: the mass is surrounded by energy hills hindering its escape to the outer, lowerenergy
world. But thanks to the tunnelling effect, escape is always possible. The same
picture applies to a branch of a tree, a nail in a wall, or anything attached to anything else.
Things can never be permanently fixed together. In particular, we will discover that every
example of light emission – even radioactivity – results from this effect.The quantum of
action thus implies that
⊳ Decay is part of nature.
Note that decay often appears in everyday life, under a different name: breaking. In fact,
Ref. 8 all breakages require the quantum of action for their description. Obviously, the cause
of breaking is often classical, but the mechanism of breaking is always quantum. Only
objects that obey quantum theory can break. In short, there are no stable excited systems
in nature. For the same reason, by the way, nomemory can be perfect. (Can you confirm
Challenge 15 s this?)
Taking a more general view, ageing and death also result from the quantum of action.
Death, like ageing, is a composition of breaking processes.When dying, the mechanisms
in a living being break. Breaking is a form of decay, and is due to tunnelling. Death is
thus a quantum process. Classically, death does not exist. Might this be the reason why
Challenge 16 s so many people believe in immortality or eternal youth?
We will also discover that the quantum of action is the reason for the importance of
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 29
m
m
FIGURE 10 Identical objects with
crossing paths.
the action observable in classical physics. In fact, the existence of a smallest action is the
reason for the least-action principle of classical physics.
A minimum action also implies that matter cannot be continuous, but must be composed
of smallest entities. Indeed, any flow of a truly continuous material would contradict
the quantum principle. Can you Challenge 17 s give the precise argument? Of course, at this point
in our adventure, the non-continuity of matter is no longer a surprise. But the quantum
of action implies that even radiation cannot be continuous. As Albert Einstein was the
first to state clearly, light is made of quantum particles.
Even more generally, the quantum of action implies that in nature
⊳ All flows and all waves are made of microscopic particles.
The term ‘microscopic’ (or ‘quantum’) is essential, as such particles do not behave like
little stones.We have already encountered several differences, and we will encounter others
shortly. For these reasons, there should be a special name for microscopic particles;
but so far all proposals, of which quanton is the most popular, have failed to catch on.
The quantum of action has several strange consequences for microscopic particles.
Take two such particles with the same mass and composition. Imagine that their paths
cross, and that at the crossing they approach each other very closely, as shown in
Figure 10. A minimum action implies that in such a situation, if the distance becomes
small enough, the two particles can switch roles, without anybody being able to avoid, or
notice, it.Thus, in a volume of gas it is impossible – thanks to the quantum of action – to
follow particles moving around and to say which particle is which. Can you confirm this
Challenge 18 s deduction, and specify the conditions, using the indeterminacy relations? In summary
⊳ In nature it is impossible to distinguish between identical particles.
Challenge 19 s Can you guess what happens in the case of light?
But matter deserves still more attention. Imagine again two particles – even two different
ones – approaching each other very closely, as shown in Figure 11. We know that if
the approach distance gets small, things get fuzzy. Now, the minimum-action principle
makes it possible for something to happen in that small domain as long as resulting outgoing
products have the same total linearmomentum, angularmomentumand energy as
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
30 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
M
m
m1
m2
m3
FIGURE 11 Transformation through
reaction.
the incoming ones. Indeed, ruling out such processes would imply that arbitrarily small
actions could be observed, thus eliminating nature’s fuzziness, as you may wish to check
Challenge 20 e for yourself. In short,
⊳ The quantum of action allows transformation of matter.
One also says that the quantum of action allows particle reactions. In fact, we will discover
that all kinds of reactions in nature, including breathing, digestion, and all other
chemical and nuclear reactions, are due just to the existence of the quantum of action.
One type of process that is especially dear to us is growth. The quantum of action
implies that all growth happens in small steps. Indeed,
⊳ All growth processes in nature are quantum processes.
Above all, as mentioned already, the quantum of action explains life. Only the quantum
of action makes reproduction and heredity possible. Birth, sexuality and death are consequences
of the quantum of action.
So Democritus was both right and wrong. He was right in deducing fundamental
constituents for matter and radiation. He was right in unifying all change in nature –
from transport to transformation and growth – as motion of particles. But he was wrong
in assuming that the small particles behave like stones.The smallest particles behave like
quantons: they behave randomly, and they behave partly as waves and partly as particles.
Randomness – a consequence of the quantum of action
What happens if we try to measure a change smaller than the quantum of action? Nature
has a simple answer: we get random results. If we build an experiment that tries to produce
a change or action of the size of a quarter of the quantum of action, the experiment
will produce a change of one quantum of action in a quarter of the cases, and no change
in three quarters of the cases, thus giving an average of one quarter of ħ.
The quantumof action leads to randomness atmicroscopic level.This can be seen also
in the following way. Because of the indeterminacy relations, it is impossible to obtain
definite values for both the momentum and the position of a particle. Obviously, this is
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 31
FIGURE 12 A famous quantum effect: how do train windows manage to show two superimposed
images? (photo © Greta Mansour).
also impossible for the individual components of an experimental set-up or an observer.
Therefore, initial conditions – both for a system and for an experimental set-up – cannot
be exactly duplicated. A minimum action thus implies that whenever an experiment on
a microscopic system is performed twice, the outcomes will (usually) be different. The
outcomes could only be the same if both the systemand the observer were in exactly the
same configuration each time. However, because of the second principle of thermodynamics
and because of the quantum of action, this is impossible.Therefore,
⊳ Microscopic systems behave randomly.
Obviously, there will be some average outcome; but in all cases,microscopic observations
are probabilistic.Many find this conclusion of quantum theory themost difficult to swallow.
The quantum of action implies that the behaviour of quantum systems is strikingly
different from that of classical systems. But the conclusion is unavoidable: nature behaves
randomly.
Can we observe randomness in everyday life? Yes. Every window proves that nature
behaves randomly on a microscopic scale. Everybody knows that one can use a train
window either to look at the outside landscape or, by concentrating on the reflected image,
to observe some interesting person inside the carriage. In other words, observations
like that of Figure 12 show that glass reflects some of the light particles and lets some
others pass through. More precisely, glass reflects a random selection of light particles;
yet the average proportion is constant. Partial reflection is thus similar to the tunnelling
effect. Indeed, the partial reflection of photons in glass is a result of the quantum of action.
Again, the situation can be described by classical physics, but the precise amount of
reflection cannot be explained without quantum theory.
⊳ Quantons move randomly.
Without the quantum of action, train journeys would be much more boring.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
321 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
FIGURE 13 A particle and a screen with two nearby slits.
Waves – a consequence of the quantum of action
The quantum of action implies an important result about the paths of particles. If a particle
travels from one point to another, there is no way to say which path it has taken
in between. Indeed, in order to distinguish between two possible, but slightly different,
paths, actions smaller than ħ would have to be measured reliably. In particular, if a particle
is sent through a screen with two sufficiently close slits, as illustrated in Figure 13,
it is impossible to say which slit the particle passed through.This impossibility is fundamental.
We already know phenomena of motion for which it is not possible to say with precision
how something moves or which path is taken behind two slits: waves behave in this
way. All waves are subject Vol. I, page 270 to the indeterminacy relations
ΔωΔt ⩾ 1
2
and ΔkΔx ⩾ 1
2
. (5)
A wave is a type of motion described by a phase that changes over space and time. This
turns out to hold for all motion. In particular, this holds for matter.
We saw above that quantum systems are subject to
ΔEΔt ⩾ ħ
2
and ΔpΔx ⩾ ħ
2
. (6)
We are thus led to ascribe a frequency and a wavelength to a quantum system:
E = ħω and p = ħk = ħ2π
λ
. (7)
The energy–frequency relation for light and the equivalent momentum–wavelength relation
were deduced by Max Planck in 1899. In the years from 1905 onwards, Albert Einstein
confirmed that the relations are valid for all examples of emission and absorption
of light. In 1923 and 1924, Louis de Broglie* predicted that the relation should hold also
* Louis de Broglie (b. 1892Diep pe, d. 1987 Paris), French physicist and professor at the Sorbonne. The
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 33
for all quantum matter particles.The experimental confirmation came a few years later.
Page 68 (This is thus another example of a discovery that was made about 20 years too late.) In
short, the quantum of action implies:
⊳ Matter particles behave like waves.
In particular, the quantum of action implies the existence of interference for streams of
matter.
Particles – a consequence of the quantum of action
The quantum of action, the smallest change, implies that flows cannot be arbitrary weak.
Vol. I, page 321 This applies to all flows: in particular, it applies to rivers, solid matter flows, gas flows,
light beams, energy flows, entropy flows, momentum flows, angular momentum flows,
probability flows, signals of all kind, electrical charge flows, colour charge flows and weak
charge flows.
Water flows in rivers, like any other matter flow, cannot be arbitrary small: the quantum
of action implies that there is a smallest matter flow in nature. Depending on the
situation, the smallest matter flow is a molecule, an atom or a smaller particle. Indeed,
the quantum of action is also at the origin of the observation of a smallest charge in
electric current. Since all matter can flow, the quantum of action implies:
⊳ All matter has particle aspects.
In the same way, the quantum of action, the smallest change, implies that light cannot
be arbitrarily faint. There is a smallest illumination in nature; it is called a photon or a
light quantum. Now, light is a wave, and the argument can be made for any other wave
as well. In short, the quantum of action thus implies:
⊳ All waves have particle aspects.
This has been proved for light waves, water waves, X rays, sound waves, plasma waves,
fluid whirls and any other wave type that has ever been observed. (Gravitational waves
have not yet been observed; it is expected that their particle-like aspects, the gravitons,
exist also in this case.)
In summary, the quantum of action states:
⊳ If something moves, it is made of quantum particles, or quantons.
energy–frequency relation for light had earnedMax Planck and Albert Einstein the Nobel Prize for Physics,
in 1918 and 1921. De Broglie expanded the relation to predict the wave nature of the electron (and of all other
quantum matter particles): this was the essence of his doctoral thesis. The prediction was first confirmed
experimentally a few years later, in 1927. For the prediction of the wave nature of matter, de Broglie received
the Nobel Prize for physics in 1929. Being an aristocrat, he did no more research after that. For example, it
was Schrödinger who then wrote down the wave equation, even though de Broglie could equally have done
so.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
34 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
Later on wewill explore and specify the exact differences between a quantumparticle and
a small stone or a grain of sand. We will discover that matter quantons move differently,
behave differently under rotation, and behave differently under exchange.
Quantum information
In computer science, the smallest unit of change is called a ‘bit change’.The existence of a
smallest change in nature implies that computer science – or information science – can
be used to describe nature, and in particular quantum theory.This analogy has attracted
much research in the past decades, and explored many interesting questions: Is unlimited
information storage possible? Can information be read out and copied completely? Can
information be transmitted while keeping it secret? Can information transmission and
storage be performed independently of noise? Can quantum physics be used to make
new types of computers? So far, the answer to all these questions is negative; but the
hope to change the situation is not dead yet.
Theanalogy between quantumtheory and information science is limited: information
science can describe only the ‘software’ side of devices. For a physicist, the ‘hardware’ side
of nature is central. The hardware of nature enters the description whenever the actual
value ħ of the quantum of action must be introduced.
As we explore the similarities and differences between nature and information science,
we will discover that the quantum of action implies that macroscopic physical systems
cannot be copied – or ‘cloned’, as quantum theorists like to say. Nature does not allow
copies of macroscopic objects. In other words:
⊳ Perfect copying machines do not exist.
The quantum of action makes it impossible to gather and use all information in a way
that allows production of a perfect copy.
The exploration of copying machines will remind us again that the precise order in
which measurements are performed in an experiment matters. When the order of measurements
can be reversed without affecting the net result, physicists speak of ‘commutation’.
The quantum of action implies:
⊳ Physical observables do not commute.
We will also find that the quantum of action implies that systems are not always independent,
Page 140 but can be entangled.This term, introduced by Erwin Schrödinger, describes
one of the most absurd consequences of quantum theory. Entanglement makes everything
in nature connected to everything else. Entanglement produces effects that seem
(but are not) faster than light.
⊳ Entanglement produces a (fake) form of non-locality.
Ref. 9 Entanglement implies that trustworthy communication cannot exist.
We will also discover that decoherence is an ubiquitous process in nature that influences
all quantumsystems; it allowsmeasurements on the one hand and makes quantum
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 35
computers Page 145 impossible on the other.
Curiosities and fun challenges about the quantum of action
Even if we accept that no experiment performed so far contradicts the minimum action,
we still have to check that the minimum action does not contradict reason. In particular,
the minimum action must also be consistent with all imagined experiments. This is not
self-evident.
∗∗
When electromagnetic fields come into play, the value of the action (usually) depends on
the choice of the vector potential, and thus on the choice of gauge. We saw in the part
Vol. III, page 78 on electrodynamics that a suitable choice of gauge can change the value of the action
by adding or subtracting any desired amount. Nevertheless, there is a smallest action in
nature.This is possible, because in quantum theory, physical gauge changes cannot add
or subtract any amount, but only multiples of twice the minimum value. Thus they do
not allow us to go below the minimum action.
∗∗
Adult plants stop growing in the dark.Without light, the reactions necessary for growth
Challenge 21 s cease. Can you show that this is a quantum effect, not explainable by classical physics?
∗∗
Most quantum processes in everyday life are electromagnetic. Can you show that the
quantum of action must also hold for nuclear processes, i.e., for processes that are not
Challenge 22 s electromagnetic?
∗∗
Challenge 23 s Is the quantum of action independent of the observer, even near the speed of light?This
question was the reason why Planck contacted the young Einstein, inviting himto Berlin,
thus introducing him to the international physics community.
∗∗
The quantum of action implies that tiny people, such as Tom Thumb, cannot exist.The
quantum of action implies that fractals cannot exist in nature. The quantum of action
implies that ‘Moore’s law’ of semiconductor electronics, which states that the number of
Challenge 24 s transistors on a chip doubles every two years, cannot be correct.Why not?
∗∗
Take a horseshoe.The distance between the two ends is not fixed, since otherwise their
position and velocity would be known at the same time, contradicting the indeterminacy
relation. Of course, this reasoning is also valid for any other solid object. In short, both
quantum mechanics and special relativity show that rigid bodies do not exist, albeit for
different reasons.
∗∗
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
36 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
Angular momentum has the same dimensions as action. A smallest action implies that
there is a smallest angular momentum in nature. How can this be, given that some particles
have spin zero, Challenge 25 s i.e., have no angular momentum?
∗∗
Could we have started the whole discussion of quantum theory by stating that there is a
Challenge 26 s minimum angular momentum instead of a minimum action?
∗∗
Niels Bohr, besides propagating the idea of a minimum action, was also an enthusiast of
the so-called complementarity principle.This is the idea that certain pairs of observables
of a system – such as position and momentum – have linked precision: if one of the pair
is known to high precision, the other is necessarily known with low precision. Can you
Challenge 27 s deduce this principle from the minimum action?
The dangers of buying a can of beans
Another way to show the absurd consequences of quantum theory is given by the ultimate
product warning, which according to certain well-informed lawyers should be
Ref. 10 printed on every can of beans and on every product package. It shows in detail how
deeply our human condition fools us.
Warning: care should be taken when looking at this product:
It emits heat radiation.
Bright light has the effect to compress this product.
Warning: care should be taken when touching this product:
Part of it could heat up while another part cools down, causing severe burns.
Warning: care should be taken when handling this product:
This product consists of at least 99.999 999 999 999 % empty space.
This product contains particles moving with speeds higher than one million kilometres
per hour.
Every kilogram of this product contains the same amount of energy as liberated by
about one hundred nuclear bombs.*
In case this product is brought in contact with antimatter, a catastrophic explosion
will occur.
In case this product is rotated, it will emit gravitational radiation.
Warning: care should be taken when transporting this product:
The force needed depends on its velocity, as does its weight.
*Astandard nuclearwarhead has an explosive yield of about 0.2megatons (implied is the standard explosive
Ref. 11 trinitrotoluene or TNT), about thirteen times the yield of the Hiroshima bomb, which was 15 kilotonne. A
megatonne is defined as 1Pcal=4.2 PJ, even though TNT delivers about 5% slightly less energy than this
value. In other words, a megaton is the energy content of about 47 g of matter. That is less than a handful
for most solids or liquids.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets 37
This product will emit additional radiation when accelerated.
This product attracts, with a force that increases with decreasing distance, every
other object around, including its purchaser’s kids.
Warning: care should be taken when storing this product:
It is impossible to keep this product in a specific place and at rest at the same time.
Except when stored underground at a depth of several kilometres, over time cosmic
radiation will render this product radioactive.
This product may disintegrate in the next 1035 years.
It could cool down and lift itself into the air.
This product warps space and time in its vicinity, including the storage container.
Even if stored in a closed container, this product is influenced and influences all
other objects in the universe, including your parents in law.
This product can disappear from its present location and reappear at any random
place in the universe, including your neighbour’s garage.
Warning: care should be taken when travelling away from this product:
It will arrive at the expiration date before the purchaser does so.
Warning: care should be taken when using this product:
Any use whatsoever will increase the entropy of the universe.
The constituents of this product are exactly the same as those of any other object
in the universe, including those of rotten fish.
All these statements are correct. The impression of a certain paranoid side to quantum
physics is purely coincidental.
A summary: quantum physics, the law and indoctrination
Don’t all the deductions from the quantum of action presented so far look wrong, or
at least crazy? In fact, if you or your lawyer made some of the statements on quantum
physics in court, maybe even under oath, you might end up in prison! However, all the
above statements are correct: they are all confirmed by experiment. And there are many
more surprises to come. You may have noticed that, in the preceding examples, we have
made no explicit reference to electricity, to the nuclear interactions or to gravity. In these
domains the surprises are even more astonishing. Observation of antimatter, electric current
without resistance, the motion inside muscles, vacuum energy, nuclear reactions in
stars, and – maybe soon – the boiling of empty space, will fascinate you as much as they
have fascinated, and still fascinate, thousands of researchers.
In particular, the consequences of the quantum of action for the early universe
are mind-boggling. Just try to explore for yourself its consequences for the big bang.
Challenge 28 d Together, all these topics will lead us a longway towards the top ofMotionMountain.The
consequences of the quantum of action are so strange, so incredible, and so numerous,
that quantum physics can rightly be called the description of motion for crazy scientists.
In a sense, this generalizes our previous definition of quantumphysics as the description
of motion related to pleasure.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
38 1 minimum action – quantum theory for poets
Unfortunately, it is sometimes said that ‘nobody understands Page 155 quantumtheory’.This is
wrong. In fact, it is worse than wrong: it is indoctrination and disinformation. Indoctrination
and disinformation are methods that prevent people from making up their own
mind and from enjoying life. In reality, the consequences of the quantum of action can
be understood and enjoyed by everybody. In order to do so, our first task on our way
towards the top ofMotionMountain will be to use the quantum of action to study of our
classical standard of motion: the motion of light.
“Nie und nirgends hat es Materie ohne
Bewegung gegeben, oder kann es sie geben. Friedrich Engels, Anti-Dühring.*”
Ref. 12 * ‘Never and nowhere has matter existed, nor can it exist, without motion.’ Friedrich Engels (1820–1895)
was one of the theoreticians of Marxism.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
Cha p t e r 2
LIGHT – THE STRANGE
CONSEQUENCES OF THE QUANTUM
OF ACTION
“AlleWesen leben vom Lichte,
jedes glückliche Geschöpfe. Friedrich Schiller,Wilhelm Tell.*”
Sinc e all the colours of materials are quantum effects, it becomes mandatory to
tudy the properties of light itself. If a smallest change really exists, then there
hould also be a smallest illumination in nature.This conclusion was already drawn
Ref. 13 in ancient Greece, for example by Epicurus (341–271 bce), who stated that light is a
stream of little particles. The smallest possible illumination would then be that due to
a single light particle. Today, the particles are called light quanta or photons. Incredibly,
Epicurus himself could have checked his prediction with an experiment.
How do faint lamps behave?
Ref. 14 Around 1930, Brumberg and Vavilov found a beautiful way to check the existence of
photons using the naked eye and a lamp. Our eyes do not allow us to consciously detect
single photons, but Brumberg and Vavilov found a way to circumvent this limitation.
In fact, the experiment is so simple that it could have been performed many centuries
earlier; but nobody had had a sufficiently daring imagination to try it.
Brumberg and Vavilov constructed a mechanical shutter that could be opened for
time intervals of 0.1 s. From the other side, in a completely dark room, they illuminated
the opening with extremely weak green light: about 200 aW at 505 nm, as shown
in Figure 14. At that intensity, whenever the shutter opens, on average about 50 photons
can pass. This is just the sensitivity threshold of the eye. To perform the experiment, they
repeatedly looked into the open shutter.The result was simple but surprising. Sometimes
they observed light, and sometimes they did not.Whether they did or did not was completely
random. Brumberg and Vavilov gave the simple explanation that at low lamp powers,
because of fluctuations, the number of photons is above the eye threshold half the
time, and below it the other half.The fluctuations are random, and so the conscious detection
of light is as well.This would not happen if light were a continuous stream: in that
case, the eye would detect light at each and every opening of the shutter. (At higher light
intensities, the percentage of non-observations quickly decreases, in accordance with the
explanation given.)
In short, a simple experiment proves:
* ‘From light all beings live, each fair-created thing.’ Friedrich Schiller (b. 1759 Marbach, d. 1805Weimar),
German poet, playwright and historian.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
40 2light – and the quantum of action
strong shutter
filter
head, after
45 minutes
in complete
darkness
lamp
FIGURE 14 How to experience single
photon effects (see text).
white red
violet
glass
photographic
film
green
FIGURE 15 How does a
white-light spectrum appear at
extremely long screen distances?
(The short-screen-distance
spectrum shown, © Andrew
Young, is optimized for CRT
display, not for colour printing, as
explained on mintaka.sdsu.edu/
GF/explain/optics/rendering.
html.)
⊳ Light is made of photons.
Nobody knows how the theory of light would have developed if this simple experiment
had been performed 100 or even 2000 years earlier.
The detection of photons becomes more evident if we use devices to help us. A simple
way is to start with a screen behind a prism illuminated with white light, as shown
in Figure 15. The light is split into colours. As the screen is placed further and further
away, the illumination intensity cannot become arbitrarily small, as that would contradict
the quantumof action. To check this prediction, we only need some black-and-white
photographic film. Film is blackened by daylight of any colour; it becomes dark grey at
medium intensities and light grey at lower intensities. Looking at an extremely light grey
film under the microscope, we discover that, even under uniform illumination, the grey
shade is actually composed of black spots, arranged more or less densely. All these spots
have the same size, as shown in Figure 16.This regular size suggests that a photographic
filmreacts to single photons. Detailed research confirms this conjecture; in the twentieth
century, the producers of photographic films have elucidated the underlying mechanism
in all its details.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 41
FIGURE 16 Exposed photographic film at increasing magnification (© Rich Evans).
FIGURE 17 Detectors that allow photon counting: photomultiplier tubes (left), an avalanche
photodiode (top right, c. 1 cm) and a multichannel plate (bottom right, c. 10 cm) (© Hamamatsu
Photonics).
Single photons can be detected most elegantly with electronic devices. Such devices
can be photomultipliers, photodiodes, multichannel plates or rod cells in the eye; a selection
is shown in Figure 17. Also these detectors show that low-intensity light does not
produce a homogeneous colour: on the contrary, low-intensity produces a random pattern
of equal spots, even when observing typical wave phenomena such as interference
patterns, as shown in Figure 18. Today, recording and counting individual photons is a
standard experimental procedure. Photon counters are part of many spectroscopy setups,
such as those used to measure tiny concentrations of materials. For example, they
are used to detect drugs in human hair.
All experiments thus show the same result: whenever sensitive light detectors are constructed
with the aim of ‘seeing’ as accurately as possible – and thus in environments as
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
422 light – and the quantum of action
FIGURE 18 Light waves are made of particles: observation of photons – black spots in these negatives
– in a low intensity double slit experiment, with exposure times of 1, 2 and 5 s, using an image
intensifier (© Delft University of Technology).
light detectors
radiating
atom
FIGURE 19 An atom radiating one
photon triggers only one detector and
recoils in only one direction.
dark as possible – one finds that light manifests as a stream of light quanta. Nowadays
they are usually called photons, a term that appeared in 1926. Light of low or high intensity
corresponds to a stream with a small or large number of photons.
A particularly interesting example of a low-intensity source of light is a single atom.
Atoms are tiny spheres.When atoms radiate light or X-rays, the radiation should be emitted
as a spherical wave. But in all experiments – see Figure 19 for a typical set-up – the
light emitted by an atom is never found to form a spherical wave, in contrast to what we
might expect from everyday physics.Whenever a radiating atom is surrounded by many
detectors, only a single detector is triggered. Only the average over many emissions and
detections yields a spherical shape. The experiments shows clearly that partial photons
cannot be detected.
All experiments in dim light thus show that the continuum description of light is
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 43
incorrect. All such experiments thus directly that light is a streamof particles, as Epicurus
had proposed in ancient Greece. More precise measurements confirm the role of the
quantum of action: every photon leads to the same amount of change. All photons of
the same frequency blacken a film or trigger a scintillation screen in the same way.The
amount of change induced by a single photon is indeed the smallest amount of change
that light can produce.
If there were no smallest action value, light could be packaged into arbitrarily small
amounts. But nature is different. In simple terms: the classical description of light by a
continuous vector potential A(t, x), Vol. III, page 81 or electromagnetic field F(t, x), whose evolution is
described by a principle of least action, is wrong. Continuous functions do not describe
the observed particle effects. Amodified description is required. The modification has to
be significant only at low light intensities, since at high, everyday intensities the classical
Lagrangian describes all experimental observations with sufficient accuracy .*
At which intensities does light cease to behave as a continuous wave?Human eyesight
does not allow us to consciously distinguish single photons, although experiments show
Ref. 15 that the hardware of the eye is in principle able to do so. The faintest stars that can be
seen at night produce a light intensity of about 0.6 nW/m2. Since the pupil of the eye is
small, and we are not able to see individual photons, photons must have energies smaller
than 100 aJ. Brumberg and Vavilov’s experiment yields an upper limit of around 20 aJ.
An exact value for the quantum of action found in light must be deduced from laboratory
experiment. Some examples are given in the following.
Photons
In general, all experiments show that a beamof light of frequency f or angular frequency
ω, which determines its colour, is accurately described as a stream of photons, each with
the same energy E given by
E = ħ 2π f = ħω. (8)
This relation was first deduced by Max Planck in 1899. He showed that for light, the
smallest measurable action is given by the quantum of action ħ. In summary, colour is a
property of photons. A coloured light beam is a hailstorm of corresponding photons.
Vol. III, page 129 The value of Planck’s constant can be determined from measurements of black bodies
Page 200 or other light sources. All such measurements coincide and yield
ħ = 1.054 571 726(47) ⋅ 10−34 Js , (9)
a value so small that we can understand why photons go unnoticed by humans. For exChallenge
29 e ample, a green photon with a wavelength of 555 nm has an energy of 0.37 aJ. Indeed, in
normal light conditions the photons are so numerous that the continuumapproximation
for the electromagnetic field is highly accurate. In the dark, the insensitivity of the signal
processing of the human eye – in particular the slowness of the light receptors – makes
Ref. 15 photon counting impossible. However, the eye is not far from the maximum possible
Challenge 30 ny sensitivity. From the numbers given above about dim stars, we can estimate that humans
* The transition from the classical case to the quantum case used to be called quantization. This concept,
and the ideas behind it, are only of historical interest today.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
44 2light – and the quantum of action
are able to see consciously, under ideal conditions, flashes of about half a dozen photons;
in normal conditions, the numbers are about ten times higher.
Let us explore the other properties of photons. Above all, photons have nomeasurable
(rest)mass and nomeasurable electric Challenge 31 s charge. Can you confirmthis? In fact, experiments
can only give an upper limit for both quantities. The present experimental upper limit
Ref. 16 for the (rest)mass of a photon is 10−52 kg, and for the charge is 5⋅10−30 times the electron
charge.These limits are so small that we can safely say that both the mass and the charge
of the photon vanish.
We know that intense light can push objects. Since the energy, the lack of mass and
Challenge 32 e the speed of photons are known, we deduce that the photon momentum is given by
p = Ec
= ħ 2π
λ
or p = ħ k. (10)
In other words, if light is made of particles, we should be able to play billiard with them.
Ref. 17 This is indeed possible, as Arthur Compton showed in a famous experiment in 1923.
He directed X-rays, which are high-energy photons, onto graphite, a material in which
electrons move almost freely. He found that whenever the electrons in the material are
hit by the X-ray photons, the deflected X-rays change colour. His experiment is shown
in Figure 20. As expected, the strength of the hit is related to the deflection angle of the
photon. From the colour change and the reflection angle, Compton confirmed that the
photon momentum indeed satisfies the expression p = ħ k.
All other experiments agree that photons have momentum. For example, when an
atom emits light, the atom feels a recoil.The momentum again turns out to be given by
the expression p = ħ k. In short, the quantum of action determines the momentum of
the photon.
The value of a photon’s momentum respects the indeterminacy principle. Just as it is
impossible tomeasure exactly both the wavelength of a wave and the position of its crest,
so it is impossible tomeasure both themomentumand the position of a photon. Can you
Challenge 33 s confirmthis? In other words, the value of the photonmomentumis a direct consequence
of the quantum of action.
From our study of classical physics, we know that light has a property beyond its
colour: light can be polarized. That is only a complicated way to say that light can turn
Vol. III, page 111 the objects that it shines on. In other words, light has an angular momentum oriented
(mainly) along the axis of propagation. What about photons?Measurements consistently
find that each light quantum carries an angular momentum given by L = ħ. It is called
its helicity.The quantity is similar to one found for massive particles: one therefore also
speaks of the spin of a photon. In short, photons somehow ‘turn’ – in a direction either
parallel or antiparallel to their direction of motion. Again, the magnitude of the photon
helicity, or spin, is no surprise; it confirms the classical relation L = E/ω between energy
Vol. III, page 111 and angular momentum that we found in the section on classical electrodynamics. Note
that, counterintuitively, the angular momentum of a single photon is fixed, and thus independent
of its energy. Even the most energetic photons have L = ħ. Of course, the
value of the helicity also respects the limit given by the quantum of action. The many
consequences of the helicity (spin) value ħ will become clear in the following.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 45
X-ray
source
X-ray
detector
sample
photon with
wavelength λ
deflected
photon after
the collision,
with wavelength
λ+Δλ
electron
after the
collision
collision
in
sample
X-ray
source
X-ray
detector
deflection
angle
FIGURE 20 A modern version of Compton’s experiment fits on a table. The experiment shows that
photons have momentum: X-rays – and thus the photons they consist of – change frequency when
they hit the electrons in matter in exactly the same way as predicted from colliding particles (© Helene
Hoffmann).
What is light?
“La lumière est un mouvement luminaire de
corps lumineux. Blaise Pascal*”
In the seventeenth century, Blaise Pascal used the above statement about light to make
fun of certain physicists, ridiculing the blatant use of a circular definition. Of course, he
was right: in his time, the definition was indeed circular, as nomeaning could be given to
any of the terms. But whenever physicists study an observation with care, philosophers
lose out. All those originally undefined terms now have a definite meaning and the circular
definition is resolved. Light is indeed a type of motion; this motion can rightly be
called ‘luminary’ because, in contrast to the motion of material bodies, it has the unique
property 󰑣 = c; the luminous bodies, called light quanta or photons, are characterized,
and differentiated from all other particles, by their dispersion relation E = cp, their energy
E = ħω, their spin L = ħ, the vanishing of all other quantum numbers, and the
property of being the quanta of the electromagnetic field.
In short, light is a stream of photons. It is indeed a ‘luminary movement of luminous
bodies’. Photons provide our first example of a general property of the world on small
scales: all waves and all flows in nature are made of quantum particles. Large numbers
of (coherent) quantum particles – or quantons – behave and formas waves.We will see
shortly that this is the case even formatter.Quantons are the fundamental constituents of
all waves and all flows, without exception.Thus, the everyday continuum description of
light is similar in many respects to the description of water as a continuous fluid: photons
are the atoms of light, and continuity is an approximation valid for large numbers of
particles. Single quantons often behave like classical particles.
Physics books used to discuss at length a so-called wave–particle duality. Let us be
clear from the start: quantons, or quantum particles, are neither classical waves nor clas-
* ‘Light is the luminary movement of luminous bodies.’ Blaise Pascal (b. 1623 Clermont, d. 1662 Paris), important
French mathematician and physicist up to the age of 26, after which he became a theologian and
philosopher.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
46 2light – and the quantum of action
sical particles. In the microscopic world, quantons are the fundamental objects.
However, there is much that is still unclear.Where, insidematter, do thesemonochromatic
photons come from? Even more interestingly, if light is made of quantons, all electromagnetic
fields, even static ones, must be made of photons as well. However, in static
fields nothing is flowing.How is this apparent contradiction resolved? And what implications
does the particle aspect have for these static fields?What is the difference between
quantons and classical particles?The properties of photons require more careful study.
The size of photons
First of all, we might ask: what are these photonsmade of? All experiments so far, performed
down to the present limit of about 10−20 m, give the same answer: ‘we can’t find
anything’.This is consistent with both a vanishing mass and a vanishing size of photons.
Indeed, we would intuitively expect a body with a finite size to have a finite mass.Thus,
although experiments can give only an upper limit, it is consistent to claim that a photon
has zero size.
A particle with zero size cannot have any constituents. Thus a photon cannot be divided
into smaller entities: photons are not composite. For this reason, they are called elementary
particles.We will soon give some further strong arguments for this result. (Can
Challenge 34 s you find one?) Nevertheless, the conclusion is strange. How can a photon have vanishing
size, have no constituents, and still be something?This is a hard question; the answer will
appear only in the last volume of our adventure.At themomentwe simply have to accept
the situation as it is.We therefore turn to an easier question.
Are photons countable? – Squeezed light
“Also gibt es sie doch. Max Planck*”
We saw above that the simplest way to count photons is to distribute them across a large
screen and then to absorb them. But thismethod is not entirely satisfactory, as it destroys
the photons. How can we count photons without destroying them?
One way is to reflect photons in a mirror and measure the recoil of the mirror. It
seems almost unbelievable, but nowadays this effect is becoming measurable even for
small numbers of photons. For example, it has to be taken into account in relation to the
Vol. II, page 162 laser mirrors used in gravitational wave detectors, whose position has to be measured
with high precision.
Another way of counting photons without destroying theminvolves the use of special
high-quality laser cavities. It is possible to count photons by the effect they have on atoms
cleverly placed inside such a cavity.
In other words, light intensity can indeed be measured without absorption. These
measurement show an important issue: even the best light beams, from the most sophisticated
lasers, fluctuate in intensity. There are no steady beams. This comes as no surprise:
* ‘Thus they do exist after all.’ Max Planck, in his later years, said this after standing silently, for a long time,
in front of an apparatus that counted single photons by producing a click for each photon it detected. For
a large part of his life, Planck was sceptical of the photon concept, even though his own experiments and
conclusions were the starting point for its introduction.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 47
if a light beam did not fluctuate, observing it twice would yield a vanishing value for the
action. However, there is aminimum action in nature, namely ħ.Thus any beamand any
flow in nature must fluctuate. But there is more.
A light beam is described by its intensity and its phase.The change – or action – that
occurs while a beammoves is given by the variation in the product of intensity and phase.
Experiments confirm the obvious deduction: the intensity and phase of a beam behave
like the momentum and position of a particle, in that they obey an indeterminacy relation.
You can deduce it yourself, in the same way as we deduced Heisenberg’s relations.
Using as characteristic intensity I = E/ω, the energy divided by the angular frequency,
and calling the phase φ, we get*
ΔI Δφ ⩾ ħ
2
. (12)
For light emitted from an ordinary lamp, the product on the left-hand side of the above
inequality is much larger than the quantum of action. On the other hand, laser beams
can (almost) reach the limit. Laser light in which the two indeterminacies differ greatly
from each other is called non-classical light or squeezed light; it is used in many modern
research applications. Such light beams have to be treated carefully, as the smallest
disturbances transform them back into ordinary laser beams, in which the two indeterminacies
have the same value. Extreme examples of non-classical light are beams with a
given, fixed, photon number, and thus with an extremely high phase indeterminacy.
The observation of non-classical light highlights a strange fact, valid even for classical
light: the number of photons in a light beam is not a well-defined quantity. In general, it
is undetermined, and it fluctuates.The number of photons at the beginning of a beam is
not necessarily the same as the number at the end of the beam. Photons, unlike stones,
cannot be counted precisely – as long as they are moving and not absorbed. In flight, it
is only possible to determine an approximate photon number, within the limits set by
indeterminacy.
One extreme example, shown in themiddle column of Figure 21, is a light beamwith
an (almost) fixed phase. In such a beam, the photon number fluctuates from zero to
infinity. In other words, in order to produce coherent light, such as a laser beam, that
approximates a pure sine wave as perfectly as possible, we must build a source in which
the photon number is as undetermined as possible.
At the other extreme is a beam with a fixed number of photons: in such a beam of
non-classical light, the phase fluctuates erratically. In contrast, the thermal light that we
encounter in most everyday situations – such as the light from an incandescent lamps
– lies somewhere in between, the phase and intensity indeterminacies being of similar
magnitude.
* A large photon number is assumed in the expression. This is obvious, as Δφ cannot grow beyond all
bounds.The exact relations are
ΔI Δ cos φ ⩾ ħ
2
|⟨sin φ⟩|
ΔI Δ sinφ ⩾ ħ
2
|⟨cos φ⟩| (11)
where ⟨x⟩ denotes the expectation value of the observable x.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
48 2light – and the quantum of action
Thermal light Coherent, or laser light Non-classical, or squeezed light
Photon sequence: bunching Little or no bunching Anti-bunching
Bose-Einstein Poisson
Sub-
Poisson
Intensity I(t)
Probability P(I)
Intensity correlation
2
1
2
1
2
1
time
intensity
time
time
Amplitude–
phase
diagram
coherence time
FIGURE 21 Three types of light: thermal light, laser light and squeezed light.
As an aside, it turns out that even in deep, dark intergalactic space, far from any star,
there are about 400 photons per cubic centimetre. This number, like the number of photons
in a light beam, also has a measurement indeterminacy. Challenge 35 ny Can you estimate it?
In summary, unlike pebbles, photons are countable, but their number is not fixed. And
this is not the only difference between photons and pebbles.
The positions of photons
Where is a photon when it moves in a beam of light? Quantum theory gives a simple
answer: nowhere in particular. This is proved most spectacularly by experiments with
interferometers, such as the basic interferometer shown in Figure 22. Interferometers
show that even a beammade of a single photon can be split, led along two different paths,
and then recombined. The resulting interference shows that the single photon cannot be
said to have taken either of the two paths. If one of the two paths is blocked, the pattern
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 49
source
two identical
photons
detectors
possible
light
paths
mirrors
beam
splitter
beam
splitter
The Mach-Zehnder interferometer
FIGURE 22 The Mach–Zehnder interferometer and a practical realization, about 0.5m in size (© Félix
Dieu and Gaël Osowiecki).
on the screen changes. In other words, somehow the photon must have taken both paths
at the same time. Photons cannot be localized: they have no position.*
This impossibility of localizing photons can be quantified. It is impossible to localize
photons in the direction transverse to the motion. It is less difficult to localize photons
along the direction of motion. In the latter case, the quantum of action implies that the
indeterminacy in the longitudinal position is given by the wavelength of the light. Can
Challenge 36 e you confirm this?
* One cannot avoid this conclusion by saying that photons are split at the beam splitter: if a detector is
placed in each arm, one finds that they never detect a photon at the same time. Photons cannot be divided.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
50 2light – and the quantum of action
light detector
D1
light detector
D2
coincidence
counter
adjustable
position
incoming
light
beam
The Hanbury Brown–Twiss experiment
FIGURE 23 How
to measure
photon statistics
with an
electronic
coincidence
counter, the
variation being
measured by
varying the
position of a
detector.
In particular, thismeans that photons cannot be simply visualized as short wave trains.
Photons are truly unlocalizable entities, specific to the quantum world.
Now, if photons can almost be localized along their direction of motion, we can ask
how photons are lined up in a light beam. Of course, we have just seen that it does not
make sense to speak of their precise position. But do photons in a perfect beam arrive at
almost-regular intervals?
To the shame of physicists, the study of this question was initiated by two astronomers,
Robert Hanbury Brown Ref. 18 and Richard Twiss, in 1956.They used a simple method to measure
the probability that the second photon in a light beam arrives at a given time after
the first one. They simply split the beam, put one detector in the first branch, and varied
the position of a second detector in the other branch.
Hanbury Brown and Twiss found that, for coherent light, the clicks in the two counters
– and thus the photons themselves – are correlated.This result is completely contrary to
classical electrodynamics.The result is one of themany that show that photons are indeed
necessary to describe light. To be more precise, their experiment showed that whenever
the first photon hits, the second one is most likely to hit just afterwards. Thus, photons
Page 59 in beams are bunched. (As we will see below, this also implies that photons are bosons.)
Every light beam has an upper time limit for bunching, called the coherence time. For
times longer than the coherence time, the probability for bunching is low, and independent
of the time interval, as shown in Figure 23. The coherence time characterizes every
light beam, or rather every light source. In fact, it is often easier to think in terms of the
coherence length of a light beam. For thermal lamps, the coherence length is only a few
micrometres: a small multiple of the wavelength.The largest coherence lengths, of over
100 000 km, are obtained with research lasers. Interestingly, coherent light is even found
Ref. 19 in nature: several special stars have been found to emit it.
Although the intensity of a good laser beam is almost constant, the photons do not
arrive at regular intervals. Even the best laser light shows bunching, though with different
statistics and to a lesser degree than lamp light. Light whose photons arrive regularly,
thus exhibiting so-called (photon) anti-bunching, is obviously non-classical in the sense
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 51
Ekin
Ekin=h (ω−ωt)
ω
kinetic energy of
emitted electrons
frequency of lamp light
metal plate
in vacuum
lamp
electrons
threshold
FIGURE 24 The kinetic
energy of electrons emitted in
the photoelectric effect.
defined above; such light can be produced only by special experimental arrangements.
Extreme examples of this phenomenon are being investigated at present by several research
groups aiming to construct light sources that emit one photon at a time, at regular
time intervals, as reliably as possible.
In summary, experiments force us to conclude that light is made of photons, but also
that photons cannot be localized in light beams. It makes no sense to talk about the
position of a photon in general; the idea makes sense only in some special situations,
and then only approximately and as a statistical average.
Are photons necessary?
In light of the results uncovered so far, the answer to the above question is obvious. But
the issue is tricky. In textbooks, the photoelectric effect is usually cited as the first and
most obvious experimental proof of the existence of photons. In 1887, Heinrich Hertz
observed that for certain metals, such as lithium or caesium, incident ultraviolet light
leads to charging of the metal. Later studies of the effect showed that the light causes
emission of electrons, and that the energy of the ejected electrons does not depend on
the intensity of the light, but only on the difference between ħ times its frequency and
a material-dependent threshold energy. Figure 24 summarizes the experiment and the
measurements.
In classical physics, the photoelectric effect is difficult to explain. But in 1905, Albert
Ref. 20 Einstein deduced the measurements from the assumption that light is made of photons
of energy E = ħω. He imagined that this energy is used partly to take the electron over
the threshold, and partly to give it kinetic energy. More photons only lead to more electrons,
not to faster ones. In 1921, Einstein received the Nobel Prize for the explanation
of the photoelectric effect. But Einstein was a genius: he deduced the correct result by a
somewhat incorrect reasoning.The (small) mistake was the assumption that a classical,
continuous light beam would produce a different effect. In fact, it is easy to see that a
classical, continuous electromagnetic field interacting with discrete matter, made of discrete
atoms containing discrete electrons, would lead to exactly the same result, as long as
the motion of electrons is described by quantum theory. Several researchers confirmed
Ref. 21 this early in the twentieth century. The photoelectric effect by itself does not imply the
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
522 light – and the quantum of action
existence of photons.
Indeed, many researchers in the past were unconvinced that the photoelectric effect
shows the existence of photons. Historically, the most important argument for the necessity
of light quanta was given by Henri Poincaré. In 1911 and 1912, aged 57 and only a few
months before his death, he published two influential papers proving that the radiation
law of black bodies – in which the quantumof action had been discovered byMax Planck
– requires Ref. 22 the existence of photons. He also showed that the amount of radiation emitted
by a hot body is finite only because of the quantum nature of the processes leading to light
emission. A description of these processes in terms of classical electrodynamics would
lead to (almost) infinite amounts of radiated energy. Poincaré’s two influential papers
convinced most physicists that it was worthwhile to study quantum phenomena in more
detail. Poincaré did not know about the action limit S ⩾ ħ; yet his argument is based on
the observation that light of a given frequency has a minimum intensity, namely a single
photon. Such a one-photon beam may be split into two beams, for example by using a
half-silvered mirror. However, taken together, those two beams never contain more than
a single photon.
Another interesting experiment that requires photons is the observation of ‘molecules
Ref. 23 of photons’. In 1995, Jacobson et al. predicted that the de Broglie wavelength of a packet of
photons could be observed. According to quantumtheory, the packetwavelength is given
by the wavelength of a single photon divided by the number of photons in the packet.The
team argued that the packet wavelength could be observable if such a packet could be
split and recombined without destroying the cohesion within it. In 1999, this effect was
indeed observed by de Pádua and his research group in Brazil.They used a careful set-up
with a nonlinear crystal to create what they call a biphoton, and observed its interference
properties, finding a reduction in the effective wavelength by the predicted factor of two.
Ref. 24 Since then, packages with three and even four entangled photons have been created and
observed.
Yet another argument for the necessity of photons is the above-mentioned recoil felt
Page 42 by atoms emitting light.The recoil measured in these cases is best explained by the emission
of a photon in a particular direction. In contrast, classical electrodynamics predicts
the emission of a spherical wave, with no preferred direction.
Page 48 Obviously, the observation of non-classical light, also called squeezed light, also argues
for the existence of photons, as squeezed light proves that photons are indeed an intrinsic
Ref. 25 aspect of light, necessary even when interactions with matter play no role. The same is
true for the Hanbury Brown–Twiss effect.
Finally, the spontaneous decay of excited atomic states also requires the existence of
photons.This cannot be explained by a continuum description of light.
In summary, the concept of a photon is indeed necessary for a precise description
of light; but the details are often subtle, as the properties of photons are unusual and
require a change in our habits of thought. To avoid these issues, most textbooks stop
discussing photons after coming to the photoelectric effect.This is a pity, as it is only then
that things get interesting. Ponder the following. Obviously, all electromagnetic fields are
made of photons. At present, photons can be counted for gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet
light, visible light and infrared light. However, for lower frequencies, such as radio waves,
photons have not yet been detected. Can you imagine what would be necessary to count
Challenge 37 ny the photons emitted from a radio station?This issue leads directly to themost important
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 53
pocket lamps
lasers or other
coherent light source
FIGURE 25 Light
crossing light.
FIGURE 26 Observed interference patterns.
question of all:
Interference: how can a wave be made up of particles?
“Die ganzen fünfzig Jahre bewusster Grübelei
haben mich der Antwort auf die Frage ‘Was
sind Lichtquanten?’ nicht näher gebracht.
Heute glaubt zwar jeder Lump er wisse es, aber
er täuscht sich. Albert Einstein, 1951 *”
If a light wave is made of particles, one must be able to explain each and every wave
property in terms of photons.The experiments mentioned above already hint that this is
possible only because photons are quantum particles. Let us take a more detailed look at
this argument.
Light can cross other light undisturbed. This observation is not hard to explain with
photons; since photons do not interact with each other, and are point-like, they ‘never’ hit
* ‘Fifty years of conscious brooding have not brought me nearer to the answer to the question ‘What are
light quanta?’ Nowadays every bounder thinks he knows it, but he is wrong.’ Einstein wrote this a few years
Ref. 26 before his death in a letter to Michele Besso.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
54 2light – and the quantum of action
S1
S2
two lasers or
point sources
screen
t1
t2
t3
the arrow model:
s
d
FIGURE 27 Interference and the description of
light with arrows (at three instants of time).
each other. In fact, there is an extremely small positive probability for their interaction,
Vol. V, page 114 as will be found below, but this effect is not observable in everyday life.
But a problem remains. If two light beams of identical frequency and fixed phase relaVol.
III, page 96 tion cross, we observe alternating bright and dark regions: so-called interference fringes.*
How do these interference fringes appear? How can it be that photons are not detected
in the dark regions?We already know the only possible answer: the brightness at a given
place corresponds to the probability that a photon will arrive there.The fringes imply:
⊳ Photons behave like moving little arrows..
Some further thought leads to the following description:
— The arrow is always perpendicular to the direction of motion.
— The arrow’s direction stays fixed in space when the photons move.
— The length of an arrow shrinks with the square of the distance travelled.
— The probability of a photon arriving somewhere is given by the square of an arrow.
— The final arrow is the sum of all the arrows arriving there by all possible paths.
— Photons emitted by single-coloured sources are emitted with arrows of constant
length pointing in the direction ωt; in other words, such sources spit out photons
with a rotating mouth.
* This experiment is only possible if both beams are derived from a single beam by splitting, or if two
Challenge 38 s expensive high-precision lasers are used. (Why?)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 55
— Photons emitted by thermal sources, such as pocket lamps, are emitted with arrows
of constant length pointing in random directions.
With this simplemodel* we can explain the wave behaviour of light. In particular, we can
describe the interference stripes seen in laser experiments which are shown schematically
in Figure 25 and Figure 27. You can check that in some regions the two arrows travelling
through the two slits add up to zero for all times. No photons are detected there: those
regions are black. In other regions, the arrows always add up to the maximal value.These
regions are always bright. Regions in between have intermediate shades. Obviously, in the
case of usual pocket lamps, shown in the left-hand diagram of Figure 25, the brightness
in the common region also behaves as expected: the averages simply add up.
You may wish to calculate the distance between the lines, given the source distance s,
the colour and the distance d to the screen. (This experiment was used to determine the
wavelength of the Challenge 39 s light for the first time.)
Obviously, the photonmodel implies that an interference pattern is built up as the sum
of a large number of single-photon hits. Using low-intensity beams, we should therefore
be able to see how these little spots slowly build up an interference pattern by accumulating
in the bright regions and never hitting the dark regions. This is indeed the case, as
Page 42 we have seen earlier on. All experiments confirm this description.
In summary, photons are quantum particles. Quantum particles can produce interference
patterns and wave behaviour, because they are described by an arrow whose length
squared gives the probability for its detection.
Interference of a single photon
It is important to note that interference between two light beams is not the result of two
different photons cancelling each other out or being added together. Such cancellation
would contradict conservation of energy and momentum. Interference is an effect applicable
to each photon separately, because each photon is spread out over the whole set-up:
each photon takes all possible paths. As Paul Dirac stressed:
Ref. 27 ⊳ Each photon interferes only with itself.
Interference only works because photons are quantons, and not classical particles.
Dirac’s oft-quoted statement leads to a famous paradox: if a photon can interfere only
with itself, how can two laser beams from two different lasers interfere with each other?
The answer given by quantum physics is simple but strange: in the region where the
beams interfere, it is impossible to say from which source a photon has come.The photons
in the crossing region cannot be said to come from a specific source. Photons in
the interference region are quantons, which indeed interfere only with themselves. In
that region, one cannot truly say that light is a flow of photons. Despite regular claims to
the contrary, Dirac’s statement is correct. It is a strange consequence of the quantum of
action.
*The model gives a correct description of light except that it neglects polarization. To add it, it is necessary
to combine arrows that rotate in both senses around the direction of motion.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
56 2light – and the quantum of action
source image
mirror
arrow sum
screen
FIGURE 28 Light reflected by a
mirror, and the corresponding
arrows (at an instant of time).
Reflectionan d diffraction deduced from photon arrows
Waves also show diffraction. Diffraction is the change of propagation direction of light
or any other wave near edges. To understand this phenomenon with photons, let us start
with a simplemirror, and study reflection first. Photons (like all quantum particles) move
fromsource to detector by all possible paths. As Richard Feynman,* who discovered this
explanation, liked to stress, the term ‘all’ has to be taken literally. This is not a big deal in
the explanation of interference. But in order to understand a mirror, we have to include
all possibilities, however crazy they seem, as shown in Figure 28.
As stated above, a light source emits rotating arrows. To determine the probability
that light arrives at a certain location within the image, we have to add up all the arrows
arriving at the same time at that location. For each path, the arrow orientation at the
image is shown – for convenience only – below the corresponding segment of themirror.
The angle and length of the arriving arrow depends on the path. Note that the sum of all
the arrows does not vanish: light does indeed arrive at the image. Moreover, the largest
contribution comes from the paths near to the middle. If we were to perform the same
calculation for another image location, (almost) no light would get there.
* Richard (‘Dick’) Phillips Feynman (b. 1918 New York City, d. 1988), US-American physicist. One of the
founders of quantum electrodynamics, he also discovered the ‘sum-over-histories’ reformulation of quantum
theory, made important contributions to the theory of the weak interaction and to quantum gravity,
and co-authored a famous textbook, the Feynman Lectures on Physics.He is one of those theoretical physicists
who made his career mainly by performing complex calculations – but he backtracked with age, most
successfully in his teachings and physics books, which are all worth reading. He was deeply dedicated to
physics and to enlarging knowledge, and was a collector of surprising physical explanations. He helped
building the nuclear bomb, wrote papers in topless bars, avoided to take any professional responsibility,
and was famously arrogant and disrespectful of authority. He wrote several popular books on the events
of his life. Though he tried to surpass the genius of Wolfgang Pauli throughout his life, he failed in this
endeavour. He shared the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on quantum electrodynamics.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 57
screen
source image
striped
mirror
arrow sum
at image
source point
usual
mirror
arrow sum
at point
vanishes
FIGURE 29 The light reflected
by a badly-placed mirror and by
a grating.
In short, the rule that reflection occurs with the incoming angle equal to the outgoing
angle is an approximation, following from the arrow model of light. In fact, a detailed
calculation, with more arrows, shows that the approximation is quite precise: the errors
are much smaller than the wavelength of the light.
The proof that light does indeed take all these strange paths is given by a more specialized
mirror. As show in Figure 29, we can repeat the experiment with a mirror that
reflects only along certain stripes. In this case, the stripes have been carefully chosen so
that the corresponding path lengths lead to arrows with a bias in one direction, namely
to the left.The arrow addition now shows that such a specialized mirror – usually called
a grating – allows light to be reflected in unusual directions. Indeed, this behaviour is
standard for waves: it is called diffraction. In short, the arrow model for photons allows
us to describe this wave property of light, provided that photons follow the ‘crazy’ probability
scheme. Do not get upset! As was said above, quantum theory is the theory for
crazy people.
You may wish to check that the arrow model, with the approximations it generates
by summing over all possible paths, automatically ensures that the quantum of action is
indeed the smallest Challenge 40 s action that can be observed.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
58 2light – and the quantum of action
air
water
light beam
FIGURE 30 If light were made of little stones, they would
move faster in water.
Refractionan d partial reflectionfr om photon arrows
All waves have a signal velocity.The signal velocity also depends on themediuminwhich
they propagate. As a consequence, waves show refraction when they move from one
medium into another with different signal velocity. Interestingly, the naive particle picture
of photons as little stones would imply that light is faster in materials with high
refractive indices: the so-called dense materials. (See Figure 30.) Can you confirm this?
Challenge 41 e However, experiments show that light in dense materials moves slowly.Thewave picture
has no difficulty explaining this observation. Challenge 42 e (Can you confirm this?) Historically, this
was one of the arguments against the particle theory of light. In contrast, the arrowmodel
Challenge 43 e of light presented above is able to explain refraction properly. It is not difficult: try it.
Waves also reflect partially from materials such as glass.This is one of the most difficult
wave properties to explain with photons. But it is one of the few effects that is not explained
by a classicalwave theory of light. However, it is explained by the arrowmodel, as
we will find out shortly. Partial reflection confirms the first two rules of the arrow model.
Page 54 Partial reflection shows that photons indeed behave randomly: some are reflected and
other are not, without any selection criterion.The distinction is purely statistical. More
about this issue shortly.
From photons to waves
In waves, the fields oscillate in time and space. One way to show how waves can be made
of particles is to show how to build up a sine wave using a large number of photons. A
Ref. 28 sine wave is a coherent state of light. The way to build them up was explained by Roy
Glauber. In fact, to build a pure sine wave, we need a superposition of a beam with one
photon, a beam with two photons, a beam with three photons, and so on. Together, they
give a perfect sine wave.As expected, its photon number fluctuates to the highest possible
degree.
If we repeat the calculation for non-ideal beams, we find that the indeterminacy relation
for energy and time is respected: every emitted beam will possess a certain spectral
width. Purelymonochromatic light does not exist. Similarly, no system that emits a wave
at random can produce a monochromatic wave. All experiments confirm these results.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 59
Waves can be polarized. So far, we have disregarded this property. In the photon picture,
polarization is the result of carefully superposing beams of photons spinning clockwise
and anticlockwise. Indeed, we know that linear polarization can be seen as a result
of superposing circularly-polarized light of both signs, using the proper phase. What
seemed a curiosity in classical optics turns out to be a fundamental justification for quantum
theory.
Photons are indistinguishable. When two photons of the same colour cross, there is
no way to say afterwards which of the two is which. The quantum of action makes this
impossible.The indistinguishability of photons has an interesting consequence. It is impossible
to say which emitted photon corresponds to which arriving photon. In other
words, there is no way to follow the path of a photon, as we are used to following the
path of a billiard ball. Photons are indeed indistinguishable. Page 50 In addition, the experiment
Ref. 29 by Hanbury Brown and Twiss implies that photons are bosons. We will discover more
Page 103 details about the specific indistinguishability of bosons later in.
In summary, we find that light waves can indeed be built of particles. However, this is
only possible with the proviso that photons
— are not precisely countable,
— arenot localizable,
— have no size, no charge and no mass,
— carry an (approximate) phase,
— carryspin,
— are indistinguishable bosons,
— can take any path whatsoever,
— have no definite origin, and
— have an detection probability given by the square of the sum of amplitudes for all
possible paths leading to the point of detection.
In other words, light can be made of particles only if these particles have very special
quantum properties.These quantum properties allow photons to behave like waves when
they are present in large numbers.
Canlight move faster than light? – Virtual photons
In a vacuum, light canmove faster than c, as well as slower than c.The quantumprinciple
provides the details. As long as this principle is obeyed, the speed of a short light flash
can differ – though only by a tiny amount – from the ‘official’ value. Can you estimate
Challenge 44 ny the allowable difference in arrival time for a light flash coming from the dawn of time?
The arrow explanation gives the same result. If we take into account the crazy possibility
that photons can move with any speed, we find that all speeds very different from
c cancel out. The only variation that remains, translated into distances, is the indetermiChallenge
45 ny nacy of about one wavelength in the longitudinal direction, which we mentioned above.
More bizarre consequences of the quantumof action appear when we study static electric
fields, such as the field around a charged metal sphere. Obviously, such a field must
also be made of photons. How do they move? It turns out that static electric fields are
made of virtual photons. Virtual photons are photons that do not appear as free particles:
they only appear for an extremely short time before they disappear again. In the
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
60 2light – and the quantum of action
case of a static electric field, they are longitudinally polarized, and do not carry energy
away. Virtual photons, like other virtual particles, are ‘shadows’ of particles that obey
ΔxΔp ⩽ ħ/2 . (13)
Rather than obeying the usual indeterminacy relation, they obey the opposite relation,
which expresses their very brief appearance. Despite their intrinsically short life, and despite
the impossibility of detecting them directly, virtual particles have important effects.
We will explore virtual Page 180 particles in detail shortly.
In fact, the vector potential A allows four polarizations, corresponding to the four
coordinates (t, x, y, z). It turns out that for the photons one usually talks about – the
free or real photons – the polarizations in the t and z directions cancel out, so that one
observes only the x and y polarizations in actual experiments.
For bound or virtual photons, the situation is different. All four polarizations are possible.
Indeed, the z and t polarizations are the ones that can be said to be the building
blocks of static electric and magnetic fields.
In other words, static electric and magnetic fields are continuous flows of virtual photons.
In contrast to real photons, virtual photons can have mass, can have spin directions
not pointing along the path of motion, and can have momentum opposite to their direction
of motion. Exchange of virtual photons leads to the attraction of bodies of different
charge. In fact, virtual photons necessarily appear in any description of electromagnetic
Vol. V, page 106 interactions. Later on we will discuss their effects further – including the famous attraction
of neutral bodies.
In summary, light can indeed move faster than light, though only by an amount allowed
by the quantumof action. For everyday situations, i.e., for high values of the action,
all quantum effects average out, including light velocities different from c.
Ref. 30 Not only the position, but also the energy of a single photon can be undefined. For
example, certain materials split one photon of energy ħω into two photons, whose two
energies add up to the original one. Quantum mechanics implies that the energy partitioning
is known only when the energy of one of the two photons is measured. Only at
that very instant is the energy of the second photon known. Before the measurement,
both photons have undefined energies. The process of energy fixing takes place instanPage
141 taneously, even if the second photon is far away. We will explain below the background
to this and similar strange effects, which seem to be faster than light. In fact, despite the
appearance, these observations do not involve faster-than-light transmission of energy
Challenge 46 s or information.
Indeterminacy of electric fields
We have seen that the quantum of action implies an indeterminacy for light intensity.
Since light is an electromagnetic wave, this indeterminacy implies similar, separate limits
for electric and magnetic fields at a given point in space. This conclusion was first drawn
Ref. 31 in 1933 by Bohr and Rosenfeld.They started fromthe effects of the fields on a test particle
of mass m and charge q, which are described by:
ma = q (E + 󰑣 × b). (14)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 61
air
water
α1
p1
p2
α2
FIGURE 31 Refraction and photons.
Since it is impossible tomeasure both themomentumand the position of a particle, they
deduced an indeterminacy Challenge 47 ny for the electrical field, given by
ΔE = ħ
q Δx t
, (15)
where t is themeasurement time and Δx is the position indeterminacy.Thus every value
of an electric field, and similarly of a magnetic field, possesses an indeterminacy. The
state of the electromagnetic field behaves like the state of matter in this respect: both
follow an indeterminacy relation.
Curiosities and fun challenges about photons
Can one explain refractionwith photons?Newton was not able to do so, but today we can.
In refraction by a horizontal surface, as shown in Figure 31, the situationis translationally
invariant along the horizontal direction. Therefore, the momentum component along
this direction is conserved: p1 sin α1 = p2 sin α2. The photon energy E = E1 = E2 is
obviously conserved. The index of refraction n is defined in terms of momentum and
energy as
n = cp
E
. (16)
Challenge 48 e The ‘law’ of refraction follows:
sin α1
sin α2
= n. (17)
The relation is known since the middle ages.
There is an important issue here. In a material, the velocity of a photon 󰑣 = δE/δp
in a light ray differs from the phase velocity u = E/p that enters into the calculation. In
summary, inside matter, the concept of photon must be used with extreme care.
∗∗
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
622 light – and the quantum of action
FIGURE 32 The blue shades of the sky and the colours
of clouds are due to various degrees of Rayleigh, Mie
and Tyndall scattering (© Giorgio di Iorio).
If an electromagnetic wave has amplitude A, the photon density d is
d = A2
ħω
. (18)
Challenge 49 ny Can you show this?
∗∗
A typical effect of the quantum ‘laws’ is the yellow colour of the lamps used for street
illumination in most cities. They emit pure yellow light of (almost) a single frequency;
that is why no other colours can be distinguished in their light. According to classical
electrodynamics, harmonics of that light frequency should also be emitted. Experiments
show, however, that this is not the case; classical electrodynamics is thus wrong. Is this
Challenge 50 s argument correct?
∗∗
What happens to photons that hit an object but are not absorbed or transmitted? Generally
speaking, they are scattered. Scattering is the name for any process that changes the
motion of light (or that of any other wave).The details of the scattering process depend
on the object; some scattering processes only change the direction ofmotion, others also
change the frequency. Table 3 gives an overview of processes that scatter light.
All scattering properties depend on the material that produces the deflection of light.
Among others, the study of scattering processes explains many colours of transparent
Page 160 materials, as we will see below.
Challenge 51 e We note that the bending of light due to gravity is not called scattering.Why?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
2light – and the quantum of action 63
TABLE 3 Types of light scattering.
S c at t e r i n g
t y p e
S c at t e r e r De ta i l s E x a m pl e s
Rayleigh scattering atoms, molecules elastic, intensity
changes as 1/λ4,
scatterers smaller
than λ/10
blue sky, red evening
sky, blue cigarette
smoke
Mie scattering transparent objects,
droplets
elastic, intensity
changes as 1/λ0.5 to
1/λ2, scatterer size
around λ
blue sky, red
evenings, blue
distant mountains
Geometric scattering edges elastic, scatterer size
larger than λ
better called
diffraction, used in
interference
Tyndall scattering non-transparent objects elastic, angle weakly
or not wavelengthdependent
smog, white clouds,
fog, white cigarette
smoke
Smekal–Raman
scattering
excited atoms, molecules inelastic, light gains
energy
used in lidar
investigations of the
atmosphere
Inverse Raman
scattering
atoms, molecules inelastic, light loses
energy
used in material
research
Thomson scattering electrons elastic used for electron
density
determination
Compton scattering electrons inelastic, X-ray lose
energy
proves particle
nature of light (see
page 45)
Brillouin scattering acoustic phonons, density
variations in solids/fluids
inelastic, frequency
shift of a few GHz
used to study
phonons and to
diagnose optical
fibres
Von Laue or X-ray
scattering
crystalline solids elastic, due to
interference at
crystal planes
used to determine
crystal structures;
also called Bragg
diffraction
A summary onlight : particle and wave
In summary, light is a stream of light quanta or photons. A single photon is the smallest
possible light intensity of a given colour. Photons, like all quantons, are quite different
from everyday particles. In fact, we can argue that the only (classical) particle aspects of
photons are their quantized energy, momentum and spin. In all other respects, photons
are not like little stones. Photons move with the speed of light. Photons cannot be localized
in light beams. Photons are indistinguishable. Photons are bosons. Photons have no
mass, no charge and no size. It is more accurate to say that photons are calculating devices
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
64 2light – and the quantum of action
to precisely describe Ref. 32 observations about light.
The strange properties of photons are the reason why earlier attempts to describe light
as a stream of (classical) particles, such as the attempt of Newton, failed miserably, and
were rightly ridiculed by other scientists. Indeed, Newton upheld his theory against all
experimental evidence – especiallywith regard to light’s wave properties – which is something
that a physicist should never do. Only after people had accepted that light is a wave,
and then discovered and understood that quantum particles are fundamentally different
from classical particles, was the quanton description successful.
The quantumof action implies that all waves are streams of quantons. In fact, allwaves
are correlated streams of quantons.This is true for light, for any other form of radiation,
and for all forms of matter waves.
The indeterminacy relations show that even a single quanton can be regarded as a
wave; however, whenever it interacts with the rest of the world, it behaves as a particle. In
fact, it is essential that all waves be made of quantons: if they were not, then interactions
would be non-local, and objects could not be localized at all, contrary to experience.
To decide whether the wave or the particle description is more appropriate, we can
use the following criterion.Whenevermatter and light interact, it is more appropriate to
describe electromagnetic radiation as a wave if the wavelength λ satisfies
λ ≫ ħc
kT
, (19)
where k = 1.4 ⋅ 10−23 J/K is Boltzmann’s constant. If the wavelength ismuch smaller than
the quantity on the right-hand side, the particle description is most appropriate. If the
two sides are of the same order of magnitude, both descriptions play a role. Can you
Challenge 52 e explain the criterion?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
Cha p t e r 3
MOTION OF MATTER – BEYOND
CLASSICAL PHYSICS
“All great things begin as blasphemies. George Bernard Shaw”
The existence of a smallest action has numerous important consequences for
he motion of matter. We start with a few experimental results that show
hat the quantum of action is indeed the smallest measurable action, also in the
case of matter.Then we show that the quantum of action implies the existence of a phase
and thus of the wave properties ofmatter. Finally, fromthe quantumof action, we deduce
for themotion ofmatter the same description that we already found for light:matter particles
behave like rotating arrows.
Wine glasses, pencils and atoms – no rest
“Otium cum dignitate.* Cicero, De oratore.”
If the quantumof action is the smallest observable change in a physical system, then two
observations of the same system must always differ.Thus there cannot be perfect rest in
nature. Is that true? Experiments show that this is indeed the case.
A simple consequence of the lack of perfect rest is the impossibility of completely filling
a glass of wine. If we call a glass at maximum capacity (including surface tension
effects, to make the argument precise) ‘full’, we immediately see that the situation requires
the liquid’s surface to be completely at rest. But a completely quiet surface would
admit two successive observations that differ by less than ħ.We could try to reduce all
motions by reducing the temperature of the system. But absolute rest would imply reaching
absolute zero temperature. Experiments show that this is impossible. (Indeed, this
impossibility, the so-called third ‘law’ of thermodynamics, is equivalent to the existence
of a minimum action.)There is no rest in nature. In other words, the quantum of action
proves the old truth that a glass of wine is always partially empty and partially full.
The absence of microscopic rest, predicted by the quantum of action, is confirmed
in many experiments. For example, a pencil standing on its tip cannot remain vertical,
as shown in Figure 33, even if it is isolated from all disturbances, such as vibrations, air
molecules and thermal motion. This follows from the indeterminacy relation. In fact, it
Challenge 53 d is even possible to calculate the time after which a pencil must have fallen over.
* ‘Rest with dignity.’
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
66 3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics
α
axis FIGURE 33 A falling pencil.
But the most important consequence of the absence of rest is another.The absence of
rest for the electrons inside atoms prevents them fromfalling into the nuclei, despite their
mutual attraction. In short, the existence and the size of atoms, and thus of all matter, is
a direct consequence of the absence of microscopic rest! We will explore this in more
Page 72 detail below. Since we are made of atoms, we can say: we only exist and live because of
the quantum of action.
No infinite precision
The quantum of action prevents the observation of rest in many ways. In order to check
whether an object is at rest, we need to observe its position with high precision. Because
of the wave properties of light, we need a high-energy photon: only a high-energy photon
has a small wavelength and thus allows a precise position measurement. As a result of
this high energy, however, the object is disturbed. Worse, the disturbance itself is not
preciselymeasurable; so there is no way to determine the original position even by taking
the disturbance into account. In short, perfect rest cannot be observed even in principle.
Indeed, all experiments in which systems have been observed with high precision confirmthat
perfect rest does not exist.The absence of rest has been confirmed for electrons,
neutrons, protons, ions, atoms, molecules, atomic condensates, crystals, and objects with
a mass of up to a tonne, as used in certain gravitational wave detectors. No object is ever
at rest.
The same argument also shows that no measurement, of any observable, can ever be
performed to infinite precision. This is another of the far-reaching consequences of the
quantum of action.
Cool gas
The quantumof action implies that rest is impossible in nature. In fact, even at extremely
low temperatures, all particles inside matter are in motion. This fundamental lack of rest
is said to be due to the so-called zero-point fluctuations. A good example is provided by
the recent measurements of Bose–Einstein condensates.They are trapped gases, with a
small number of atoms (between ten and a few million), cooled to extremely low temperatures
(around 1 nK). These cool gases can be observed with high precision. Using
elaborate experimental techniques, Bose–Einstein condensates can be put into states for
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics 67
which ΔpΔx is almost exactly equal to ħ/2 – though never lower than this value.These
experiments confirm directly that there is no rest, but a fundamental fuzziness in nature.
This leads to an interesting puzzle. In a normal object, the distance between the atoms
is much larger than their de Broglie wavelength. Challenge 54 s (Can you confirm this?) But today it is
possible to cool objects to extremely low temperatures. At sufficiently low temperatures,
Ref. 33 less than 1 nK, the wavelength of the atomsmay be larger than their separation. Can you
Challenge 55 s imagine what happens in such cases?
Flows and the quantization of matter
“Die Bewegung ist die Daseinsform der Materie.Friedrich Engels, Anti-Dühring.*”
Not only does the quantum of action make rest impossible, it also makes impossible any
situation that does not change in time.The most important examples of (apparently) stationary
situations are flows.The quantumof action implies that no flow can be stationary.
More precisely, a smallest action implies that no flow can be continuous. All flows fluctuate
and are made of smallest entities: in nature, all flows are made of quantumparticles.
We saw above that this is valid for light. Two simple types of flow from our everyday experience
directly confirm this consequence from the quantum of action: flows of fluids
and flows of electricity.
Fluid flows and quantons
The flow of matter also exhibits smallest units.We mentioned early on in our adventure
Vol. I, page 331 that a consequence of the particulate structure of liquids is that oil or any other smooth
liquid produces noise when it flows through even the smoothest of pipes.We mentioned
that the noise we hear in our ears in situations of absolute silence – for example, in a
snowy and windless landscape in the mountains or in an anechoic chamber – is due
to the granularity of blood flow in the veins. Experiments show that all flows of matter
produce vibrations. This is a consequence of the quantum of action, and of the resulting
granularity of matter.
Knocking tables and quantized conductivity
If electrical current were a continuous flow, it would be possible to observe action values
as small as desired.The simplest counter-example was discovered in 1996, by José Costa-
Ref. 34, Ref. 35 Krämer and his colleagues.They put two metal wires on top of each other on a kitchen
table and attached a battery, a current-voltage converter (or simply a resistor) and a storage
oscilloscope to them. Then they measured the electrical current while knocking on
the table.That is all.
Knocking the table breaks the contact between the two wires. In the last millisecond
before the wires detach, the conductivity and thus the electrical current diminished in
regular steps of about 7 μA, as can easily be seen on the oscilloscope (see Figure 34). This
simple experiment could have beaten, if it had been performed a few years earlier, a num-
Ref. 12 * ‘Motion is matter’s way of being.’
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
68 3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics
FIGURE 34 Steps in the flow of electricity in metal wire crossings: the set-up, the nanowires at the
basis of the effect, and three measurement results (© José Costa-Krämer, AAPT from Ref. 35).
ber of other, enormously expensive experiments which discovered this quantization at
costs of several million euro each, using complex set-ups at extremely low temperatures.
In fact, the quantization of conductivity appears in any electrical contact with a small
cross-section. In such situations the quantum of action implies that the conductivity can
only be a multiple of 2e2/ħ ≈ (12 906Ω)−1. Can Challenge 56 e you confirm this result? Note that electrical
conductivity can be as small as required; only the quantized electrical conductivity
has the minimum value of 2e2/ħ.
Many more elaborate experiments confirm the observation of conductance steps.
They force us to conclude that there is a smallest electric charge in nature. This smallest
charge has the same value as the charge of an electron. Indeed, electrons turn out to
be part of every atom, in a construction to be explained shortly. In metals, a large number
of electrons can move freely: that is why metals conduct electricity so well and work
as mirrors.
In short, matter and electricity flow in smallest units. Depending on the material, the
smallest flowing units of mattermay be ‘molecules’, ‘atoms’, ‘ions’, or ‘electrons’. Electrons,
ions, atoms and molecules are quantum particles, or quantons. The quantum of action
implies that matter is made of quantons.Matter quantons share some properties with ordinary
stones, but also differ fromtheminmany ways. A stone has position and momentum,
mass and acceleration, size, shape, structure, orientation and angular momentum,
and colour.We now explore each of these properties for quantons, and see how they are
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics 69
FIGURE 35 Electrons beams
diffract and interfere at multiple
slits (© Claus Jönsson).
FIGURE 36 Formation over time of the interference pattern of electrons, here in a low-intensity
double-slit experiment: (a) 8 electrons, (b) 270 electrons, (c) 2000 electrons, (d) 6000 electrons, after 20
minutes of exposure. The last image corresponds to the situation shown in the previous figure.
(© Tonomura Akira/Hitachi).
related to the quantum of action.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
70 3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics
Matter quantons and their motion – matter waves
In 1923 and 1924, the French physicist Ref. 36 Louis de Broglie pondered the consequences of
the quantum of action for matter particles. He knew that in the case of light, the quantum
of action connects wave behaviour to particle behaviour. He reasoned that the same
should apply to matter. It dawned to him that streams of matter particles with the same
momentum should behave as waves, just as streams of light quanta do. He thus predicted
that like for light, coherentmatter flows should have a wavelength and angular frequency
given by
λ = 2π ħ
p
and ω = E
ħ
, (20)
where p and E are the momentum and the energy, respectively, of the single particles.
Equivalently, we can write the relations as
p = ħk and E = ħω. (21)
These relations state that matter quantons also behave as waves.
Soon after de Broglie’s prediction, experiments began to confirm the statement. It is
indeed observed that matter streams can diffract, refract and interfere; the observations
matched the values predicted by de Broglie. Because of the smallness of the wavelength
of quantons, careful experiments are needed to detect these effects. But one by one, all experimental
confirmations of the wave properties of light were repeated for matter beams.
For example, just as light is diffracted when it passes around an edge or through a slit,
matter is also diffracted in these situations.This is true even for electrons, the simplest
Ref. 37 particles ofmatter, as shown in Figure 35.The experiment with electrons is quite difficult.
Itwas first performed byClaus Jönsson inTübingen in 1961; in the year 2002 itwas voted
themost beautiful experiment in all of physics.Many years after Jönsson, the experiment
was repeated with a modified electron microscope, as shown in Figure 36.
Inspired by light interferometers, researchers began to build matter interferometers.
Matter interferometers have been used in many beautiful exeriments, as we will find out.
Vol. V, pagRef1. 2358 Today, matter interferometers work with beams of electrons, nucleons, nuclei, atoms, or
even large molecules. Just as observations of light interference prove the wave character
Vol. III, page 94 of light, so the interference patterns observed with matter beams prove the wave character
of matter.
Like light, matter is made of particles; like light, matter behaves as a wave when large
numbers of particles with the same momentum are involved. But although beams of
largemolecules behave as waves, everyday objects – such as cars on amotorway – do not.
There are twomain reasons for this. First, for cars on amotorway the relevant wavelength
is extremely small. Secondly, the speeds of the cars vary too much: streams of cars with
the same speed cannot be made coherent.
If matter behaves like a wave, we can draw a strange conclusion. For any wave, the
position and the wavelength cannot both be sharply defined simultaneously: the indeterminacies
of the wave number k = 2π/λ and of the position X obey the relation
ΔkΔX ≥ 1
2
. (22)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics 71
Similarly, for every wave the angular frequency ω = 2π f and the instant T of its peak
amplitude cannot both be sharply defined.Their indeterminacies are related by
ΔωΔT ≥ 1
2
. (23)
Using de Broglie’s wave properties of matter (21), we get
ΔpΔX ⩾ ħ
2
and ΔEΔT ⩾ ħ
2
. (24)
These famous relations are called Heisenberg’s indeterminacy relations. Theywere discovered
by the German physicistWerner Heisenberg in 1925.They are valid for all quantum
particles, be they matter or radiation. The indeterminacy relations state that there is no
way to simultaneously ascribe a precisemomentumand position to a quantum system,
nor to simultaneously ascribe a precise energy and age. The more accurately one quantity
is known, the less accurately the other is.* As a result, matter quantons – rather like
stones, but unlike photons – can be localized, but always only approximately.
Both indeterminacy relations have been checked experimentally in great detail. All
experiments confirm them. In fact, every experiment proving that matter behaves like a
wave is a confirmation of the indeterminacy relation – and vice versa.
When two variables are linked by indeterminacy relations, one says that they are complementary
to each other. Niels Bohr systematically explored all possible such pairs. You
can Challenge 57 s also do that for yourself. Bohr was deeply fascinated by the existence of a complementarity
principle, and he later extended it in philosophical directions. In a famous scene,
somebody asked him what was the quantity complementary to precision. He answered:
‘clarity’.
We remark that the usual, real, matter quantons always move more slowly than light.
Due to the inherent fuzziness of quantum motion, it should not come to a surprise that
there are some exceptions. Indeed, in some extremely special cases, the quantum of action
allows the existence of particles that move faster than light – so-called virtual partiPage
180 cles – which we will meet later on.
In short, the quantum of action means that matter quantons do not behave like pointlike
stones, but as waves. In particular, like for waves, the values of position and momentum
cannot both be exactly defined for quantons. The values are fuzzy – position
and momentum are undetermined.The more precisely one of the two is known, the less
precisely the other is known.
Mass and acceleration of quantons
Matter quantons, like stones, have mass. Indeed, hits by single electrons, atoms or
molecules can be detected, if sensitivemeasurement set-ups are used. Quantons can also
be slowed down or accelerated. We have already explored some of these experiments in
Vol. III, page 29 the section on electrodynamics. However, quantons differ from pebbles. Using the time–
* A policeman stops the car being driven byWerner Heisenberg. ‘Do you know how fast you were driving?’
‘No, but I know exactly where I was!’
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
723 motion of matter – beyond classical physics
FIGURE 37 Probability clouds: a hydrogen atom in its spherical ground state (left) and in a
non-spherical excited state (right) as seen by an observer travelling around it (QuickTime film produced
with Dean Dauger’s software package ‘Atom in a Box’, available at daugerresearch.com).
energy indeterminacy Challenge 58 s relation, you can deduce that
a ⩽ 2mc3
ħ
. (25)
Thus there is a maximum acceleration for quantons.* Indeed, no particle has ever been
Ref. 39 observed with a higher acceleration than this value. In fact, no particle has ever been
observed with an acceleration anywhere near this value.
Why are atoms not flat? Why do shapes exist?
The quantum of action determines all sizes in nature. In particular, it determines all
shapes. Let us explore this topic.
Experiments show that all composed quantons, such as atoms or molecules, have structures
of finite size and often with complex shape. The size and the shape of every composed
quanton are due to themotion of their constituents.Themotion of the constituents
is due to the quantum of action; but how do they move?
In 1901, Jean Perrin, and independently, in 1904, Nagaoka Hantaro, proposed that
Ref. 40 atoms are small ‘solar systems’. In 1913, Niels Bohr used this idea, combining it with the
quantum of action, and found that he could predict the size and the colour of hydrogen
Ref. 41 atoms, two properties that had not until then been understood.We will perform the calPage
170 culations below. Even Bohr knew that the calculations were not completely understood,
*We note that this acceleration limit is different from the acceleration limit due to general relativity:
a ⩽ c4
4Gm
. (26)
In particular, the quantum limit (25) applies to microscopic particles, whereas the general-relativistic limit
applies to macroscopic systems. Can you confirm that in each domain the relevant limit is the smaller of
Challenge 59 e the two?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics 73
because they seemed to assume that hydrogen atoms were flat. This is observed not to
be the case; moreover, it contradicts Challenge 60 e the quantum of action. Indeed, the quantum of action
implies that the motion of quantum constituents is fuzzy. Therefore, all composed
quantons, such as atoms or molecules, must be made of clouds of constituents.
In short, the quantum of action predicts:
⊳ Atoms are spherical clouds.
Experiment and theory show that the shape of any atomis due to the cloud, or probability
distribution, of its electrons.The quantum of action thus states that atoms or molecules
are not hard balls, as Democritus or Dalton believed, but that they are clouds. Matter is
made of clouds.
Atomic electron clouds are not infinitely hard, but can to a certain degree interpenetrate
and be deformed. The region where this occurs is called a chemical bond. Bonds
lead to molecules, liquids, solids, flowers and people. Molecules, being composed of
atoms, are composed of (deformed) spherical clouds. A detailed exploration shows that
all shapes, fromthe simplestmolecules to the shape of people, are due to the interactions
between electrons and nuclei of the constituent atoms. Nowadays, molecular shapes can
be calculated to high precision. Small molecules, like water, have shapes that are fairly
rigid, though endowed with a certain degree of elasticity. Large molecules, such as polymers
or peptides, have flexible shapes.These shape changes are essential for their effects
inside cells and thus for our survival. A large body of biophysical and biochemical research
is exploring molecular shape effects.
In summary, the quantum of action implies that shapes exist – and that they fluctuate.
For example, if a long molecule is held fixed at its two ends, it cannot remain at rest in
between. Such experiments are easy to perform nowadays, for example with DNA; they
again confirm that perfect rest does not exist, and that the quantum of action is at the
basis of chemistry and life.
All shapes are due to the quantum of action. Now, every object with a non-spherical
shape is able to rotate. Let us explore what the quantum of action can say about rotation.
Rotation, quantization of angular momentum, and the lack of
north poles
“Tristo è quel discepolo che non avanza il suo
maestro. Leonardo da Vinci*”
In everyday life, rotation is a frequent type of motion.Wheels are all around us. It turns
out that the quantum of action has important consequences for rotational motion. First
of all, we note that action and angular momentum have the same physical dimension:
both are measured in Js or Nms. It only takes a little thought to show that if matter or
radiation has a momentum and wavelength related by the quantum of action, then angular
momentum is fixed in multiples of the quantum of action.This famous argument
Ref. 42 is due to Dicke and Wittke.
* ‘Sad is that disciple who does not surpass his master.’ This statement is sculpted in large letters in the
chemistry aula of the University of Rome La Sapienza.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
74 3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics
source
θ
R
a
FIGURE 38 The quantization of
angular momentum.
Imagine a circular fence, made of N steel bars spaced apart at a distance a = 2πR/N,
as shown in Figure 38. At the centre of the fence, imagine a source of matter or radiation
that can emit particles towards the fence in any chosen direction.The linear momentum
of such a particle is p = ħk = 2πħ/λ. At the fence slits, the wave will interfere. Outside
the fence, the direction of the motion of the particle is determined by the condition
of positive interference. In other words, the angle θ, describing the direction of motion
outside the fence, is given by a sin θ = Mλ, where M is an integer. Through the deflection
due to the interference process, the fence receives a linear momentum p sin θ, or an
angular momentum L = pR sin θ. Using all these expressions, we find that the angular
momentum transferred to the fence is
L = NMħ. (27)
In other words, the angular momentum of the fence is an integer multiple of ħ. Fences
can only have integer intrinsic angular momenta (in units of ħ). The generalization of
the argument to all bodies is also correct. (Of course, this is only a hint, not a proof.)
⊳ The measured intrinsic angular momentum of bodies is always a multiple of
ħ.
Quantum theory thus states that every object’s angular momentum increases in steps.
Angular momentum is quantized.This result is confirmed by all experiments.
But rotation has more interesting aspects. Thanks to the quantum of action, just as
linear momentum is usually fuzzy, so is angular momentum.There is an indeterminacy
relation Ref. 43 for angular momentum L.The complementary variable is the phase angle φ of
Ref. 44 the rotation.The indeterminacy relation can be expressed in several ways.The simplest
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics 75
approximation Page 47 – and thus not the exact expression – is
ΔL Δφ ⩾ ħ
2
. (28)
This is obviously an approximation: the relation is only valid for large angular momenta.
It cannot be valid for small values, as Δφ by definition cannot grow beyond 2π. In particular,
angular-momentum eigenstates have ΔL = 0.*
The indeterminacy of angular momentum appears for all macroscopic bodies, or alternatively,
for all cases when the angular phase of the system can be measured.
The quantization and indeterminacy of angular momentum have important consequences.
Classically speaking, the poles of the Earth are the places that do not move
when observed by a non-rotating observer.Therefore, at those places matter would have
a defined position and a defined momentum. However, the quantum of action forbids
this.There cannot be a North Pole on Earth. More precisely, the idea of a rotational axis
is an approximation, not valid in general.
Rotation of quantons
Even more interesting are the effects of the quantum of action on microscopic particles,
such as atoms, molecules or nuclei. We note again that action and angular momentum
have the same units.The precision with which angular momentum can be measured
depends on the precision of the rotation angle. But if a microscopic particle rotates, this
rotation might be unobservable: a situation in fundamental contrast with the case of
macroscopic objects. Experiments indeed confirm that many microscopic particles have
unobservable rotation angles. For example, inmany (but not all) cases, an atomic nucleus
rotated by half a turn cannot be distinguished from the unrotated nucleus.
If a microscopic particle has a smallest unobservable rotation angle, the quantum of
action implies that the angularmomentumof that particle cannot be zero. It must always
be rotating.Therefore we need to check, for each particle, what its smallest unobservable
angle of rotation is. Physicists have checked all particles in nature in experiments, and
found smallest unobservable angles (depending on the particle type) of 0, 4π, 2π, 4π/3,
π, 4π/5, 2π/3 etc.
Let us take an example. Certain nuclei have a smallest unobservable rotation angle
of half a turn. This is the case for a prolate nucleus (one that looks like a rugby ball)
turning around its short axis. Both the largest observable rotation and the indeterminacy
are thus a quarter turn. Since the change, or action, produced by a rotation is the number
of turns multiplied by the angular momentum, we find that the angular momentum of
this nucleus is 2 ⋅ ħ.
* An exact formulation of the indeterminacy relation for angular momentum is
ΔL Δφ ⩾ ħ
2
|1 − 2πP(π)|, (29)
where P(π) is the normalized probability that the angular position has the value π. For an angularmomentum
eigenstate, one has Δφ = π/󵀂3 and P(π) = 1/2π. This exact expression has been tested and
Ref. 45 confirmed by experiments.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
76 3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics
observation
classical
prediction
z
S
silver
beam
silver
beam
N
aperture
oven
∂B
∂z
FIGURE 39 The
Stern–Gerlach
experiment.
As a general result, we deduce from the minimum angle values that the angular momentum
of amicroscopic particle can be 0, ħ/2, ħ, 3ħ/2, 2ħ, 5ħ/2, 3ħ etc. In other words,
the intrinsic angular momentum of a particle, usually called its spin, is an integer multiple
of ħ/2. Spin describes how a particle behaves under rotations. (It turns out that all
spin-0 particles are composed of other particles, thus respecting the quantum of action
as the limit for rotational motion in nature.)
How can a particle rotate? At this point, we do not yet know how to picture the rotation.
But we can feel it – just as we showed that light ismade of rotating entities: allmatter,
including electrons, can be polarized.This is shown clearly by the famous Stern–Gerlach
experiment.
Silver, Stern and Gerlach – polarization of quantons
After a year of hard work, in 1922,Otto Stern andWalther Gerlach* completed a beautiful
experiment to investigate the polarization of matter quantons.They knew that inhomogeneous
magnetic fields act as polarizers for rotating charges. Rotating charges are present
in every atom.Therefore they let a beamof silver atoms, extracted from an oven by evaporation,
pass an inhomogeneousmagnetic field.They found that the beamsplits into two
Ref. 46 separate beams, as shown in Figure 39. No atoms leave the magnetic field region in intermediate
directions. This is in full contrast to what would be expected from classical
physics.
* Otto Stern (1888–1969) and Walther Gerlach (1889–1979), both German physicists, worked together at
the University of Frankfurt. For his subsequent measurement of the anomalous magnetic moment of the
proton, Stern received the Nobel Prize for physics in 1943, after he had to flee National Socialism.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics 77
The splitting into two beams is an intrinsic property of silver atoms; today we know
that it is due to their spin. Silver atoms have spin ħ/2, and depending on their orientation
in space, they are deflected either in the direction of the field inhomogeneity or
against it.The splitting of the beam is a pure quantum effect: there are no intermediate
options. Indeed, the Stern–Gerlach experiment provides one of the clearest demonstrations
that classical physics does not work well in the microscopic domain. In 1922, the
result seemed so strange that it was studied in great detail all over the world.
When one of the two beams – say the ‘up’ beam – is passed through a second set-up,
all the atoms end up in the ‘up’ beam.The other possible exit, the ‘down’ beam, remains
unused in this case. In other words, the up and down beams, in contrast to the original
beam, cannot be split.This is not surprising.
But if the second set-up is rotated by π/2 with respect to the first, again two beams
– ‘right’ and ‘left’ – are formed, and it does not matter whether the incoming beam is
directly fromthe oven or fromthe ‘up’ part of the beam. A partially-rotated set-up yields
a partial, uneven split.The proportions depend on the angle.
We note directly that if we split the beam from the oven first vertically and then horizontally,
we get a different result from splitting Challenge 61 e the beam in the opposite order. Splitting
processes do not commute. (When the order of two operations makes a difference to
the net result, physicists call them‘non-commutative’.) Since allmeasurements are also
physical processes, we deduce that, in general, measurements and processes in quantum
systems are non-commutative.
Beam splitting is direction-dependent. Matter beams behave almost in the same way
as polarized light beams. Indeed, the inhomogeneousmagnetic field acts onmatter somewhat
like a polarizer acts on light.The up and down beams, taken together, define a polarization
direction. In fact, the polarization direction can be rotated (with the help of
a homogeneous magnetic field). Indeed, a rotated beam in a unrotated magnet behaves
like an unrotated beam in a rotated magnet.
Curiosities and fun challenges about quantum matter
“It is possible to walk while reading, but not to
read while walking. Serge Pahaut”
The quantum of action implies that there are no fractals in nature. Everything is made of
particles. And particles are clouds. Quantum theory requires that all shapes in nature be
‘fuzzy’ clouds.
∗∗
Can atoms rotate? Can an atom that falls on the floor roll under the table? Can atoms be
put into high-speed rotation? The answer is ‘no’ to all these questions, because angular
Ref. 47 momentum is quantized; moreover, atoms are not solid objects, but clouds.The macroscopic
case of an object turning more and more slowly until it stops does not exist in the
microscopic world.The quantum of action does not allow it.
∗∗
Light is refracted when it enters dense matter. Do matter waves behave similarly? Yes,
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
78 3 motion of matter – beyond classical physics
FIGURE 40 An idealized graph of
the heat capacity of hydrogen over
temperature (© Peter Eyland).
they do. In 1995, David Pritchard showed this for sodium waves entering a gas of helium
Ref. 48 and xenon.
∗∗
Many quantum effects yield curves that show steps. An important example is the molar
heat of hydrogen H2 gas, shown in Figure 40. In creasing the temperature from 20 to
8 000K, the molar heat is shows two steps, first from 3R/2 to 5R/2, and then to 7R/2.
Can you explain the reason?
∗∗
Most examples of quantum motion given so far are due to electromagnetic effects. Can
Challenge 62 ny you argue that the quantum of action must also apply to nuclear motion?
First summary onthe motion of quantum particles
In summary, the ‘digital’ beam splitting seen in the Stern–Gerlach experiment and the
wave properties ofmatter force us to rethink our description ofmotion. In special relativity,
the existence of a maximum speed forced us to introduce the concept of space-time,
and then to refine our description of motion. In general relativity, the maximum force
obliged us to introduce the concepts of horizon and curvature, and then again to refine
our description of motion. At the present point, the existence of the quantum of action
and the wave behaviour of matter force us to take two similar steps: we first introduce
the concept of a wave function, and then we refine our description of motion.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
Cha p t e r 4
THE QUANTUM DESCRIPTION OF
MATTER AND ITS MOTION
Ine veryday life and in classical physics, we say that a system has a position, that
t is oriented in a certain direction, that it has an axis of rotation, and that
t is in a state with specific momentum. In classical physics, we can talk in this way
because the state – the situation a system ‘is’ in and the properties a system‘has’ – and the
results of measurement coincide.They coincide because measurements can be imagined
to have a negligible effect on the system.
Because of the existence of a smallest action, the interaction necessary to perform a
measurement on a system cannot be made arbitrarily small. Therefore, the quantum of
action makes it impossible for us to continue saying that a system has momentum, has
position or has an axis of rotation. We are forced to use the idea of the rotating arrow
and to introduce the concept of wave function or state function. Let us see why and how.
States and measurements
Page 76 The Stern–Gerlach experiment shows that the measured values of spin orientation are
not intrinsic, but result from the measurement process itself (in this case, from the interaction
with the inhomogeneous field). This is in contrast to the spin magnitude, which is
intrinsic and state-independent. In short, the quantum of action forces us to distinguish
three entities:
— the state of the system;
— theoperationofmeasurement;
— the result of the measurement.
In contrast to the classical, everyday case, the state of a quantumsystem(the properties a
system ‘has’) is not described by the outcomes ofmeasurements.The simplest illustration
of this difference is the systemmade of a single particle in the Stern–Gerlach experiment.
The experiment shows that a spin measurement on a general (oven) particle state sometimes
gives ‘up’ (say +1), and sometimes gives ‘down’ (say −1). So a general atom, in an
oven state, has no intrinsic orientation. Only after the measurement, an atom is either in
an ‘up’ state or in a ‘down’ state. It is also found that feeding ‘up’ states into the measurement
apparatus gives ‘up’ states: thus certain special states, called eigenstates, do remain
unaffected by measurement. Finally, the experiment shows that states can be rotated by
applied fields: they have a direction in space.
The experimental observations can be described in a straightforward way. Since measurements
are operations that take a state as input and produce an output state and a
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
80 4 the quantum description of matter
measurement result, we can say:
⊳ States are described by rotating arrows.
⊳ Measurements of observables are operations on the state vectors.
⊳ Measurement results are real numbers; and like in classical physics, they usually
depend on the observer.
Thus we have distinguished three quantities that are not distinguished in classical physics:
states, measurement of observables and measurement results. Given this distinction,
quantum theory follows quite simply, as we shall see.
Because any measurement is an interaction with a system and thus a transformation
of its state, quantum physics describes physical observables as operators, and thus as
transformations in Hilbert space,The Stern–Gerlach experiment shows this clearly: the
interaction with the field influences the atoms: some in one way, and some in another
way. Experiments thus show:
⊳ Mathematically, states are complex vectors, or arrows, in an abstract space.
This space of all possible states Page 222 or arrows is a Hilbert space.
⊳ Mathematically, measurements are linear transformations, more precisely,
they are described by self-adjoint, or Hermitean, operators (or matrices).
⊳ Mathematically, changes of viewpoint are described by unitary operators (or
matrices) that act on states, or arrows, and on measurement operators.
Quantum-mechanical experiments also show that a measurement of an observable can
only give a result that is an eigenvalue of the corresponding transformation.The resulting
states, those exceptional states that are not influenced when the corresponding variable
is measured, are the eigenvectors. In short, every expert on motion must know what an
eigenvalue and an eigenvector is.
For any linear transformation T, those special vectors ψ that are transformed into
multiples of themselves,
Tψ = λψ (30)
are called eigenvectors (or eigenstates), and the multiplication factor λ is called the associated
eigenvalue. Experiments show:
⊳ The state of the system after a measurement is given by the eigenvector corresponding
to the measured eigenvalue.
In the Stern–Gerlach experiment, the eigenstates are the ‘up’ and the ‘down’ states. In
general, the eigenstates are those states that do not change when the corresponding variable
ismeasured. Eigenvalues of Hermitean operators are always real, so that consistency
is ensured: all measurement results are real numbers.
In summary, the quantum of action obliges us to distinguish between three concepts
that are mixed together in classical physics: the state of a system, a measurement on the
system, and the measurement result. The quantum of action forces us to change the vocabulary
with which we describe nature, and obliges to use more differentiated concepts.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 81
Now follows the main step: the description of motion with these concepts. This is what
is usually called ‘quantum theory’.
Visualizing the wave function: rotating arrows and probability
clouds
Above, we described the state of a quanton with an arrow. In fact, this is an approximation;
more precisely,
⊳ The state of a quantum particle is described by a spatial distribution of arrows,
a so-called wave function.
To develop a visual image of the wave function, we first imagine a quantum particle that
is localized as much as possible. In this case, thewave function for a free quanton can be
described simply by a single rotating arrow.
When a localized quanton travels through space, the attached arrow rotates. If the
particle is non-relativistic and if spin can be neglected, the rotation takes place in a plane
perpendicular to the direction ofmotion. The end of the arrow then traces a helix around
the direction of motion. In this case, the state at a given time is described by the angle
of the arrow.This angle is the quantum phase.The quantumphase is responsible for the
wave properties of matter, as we will see.The wavelength and the frequency of the helix
are determined by the momentum and the kinetic energy of the particle.
If the particle is not localized – but still non-relativistic and still with negligible spin
effects – the state, or the wave function, defines a rotating arrow at each point in space.
The rotation still takes place in a plane perpendicular to the direction ofmotion. But now
we have a distribution of arrows that trace helices parallel to the direction of motion. At
each point in space and time, the state has a quantum phase and a length of the arrow.
Figure 41 shows an example of evolution of a wave function. The direction of the arrow
at each point is shown by the colour at the specific point. The length of the arrow
is shown by the brightness of the colour. The wave function ψ(t, x) for non-relativistic
particles with negligible spin effects is described by a length and a phase: it is a complex
number Page 211 at each point in space. The phase is essential for interference and many other
wave effects.Whatmeasurable property does the amplitude, the length of the local arrow,
describe?The answer was given by the German physicistMax Born: the amplitude of the
wave function is a probability amplitude. The square of the amplitude, i.e., the quantity
|ψ(t, x)|2, gives the probability to find the particle at the place x at time t.
In other terms, a wave function is a combination of two ideas. On one hand, a wave
function is a cloud. On the other hand, at each point of the cloud one has to imagine
an arrow. Over time, the arrows rotate and the cloud changes shape. We can clarify the
situation further.
⊳ In every process in which the phase of the wave function is not important,
the cloud image of the wave function is sufficient and correct.
For example, the motion of atoms of molecules in gases or liquids can be imagined as
the motion of cloudy objects. It needs to be stressed that the clouds in question are quite
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
824 the quantum description of matter
FIGURE 41 The motion of a wave
function, the quantum state, through a
double slit, showing both the particle
and the wave properties of matter. The
density of the state is displayed by
brightness, and the local phase is
encoded in the colour. (QuickTime film
© Bernd Thaller)
hard: it takes a lot of energy to deform atomic clouds.The hardness of a typical crystals
is directly related to the hardness of the atomic clouds that are found inside. Atoms are
extremely stiff, or hard clouds.
On the other hand,
⊳ In every process in which the phase of the wave function does play a role,
the cloud image of the wave function needs to be expanded with arrows at
each point.
This is the case for interference processes of quantons, but also for the precise description
of chemical bonds. (An approximate description can be achieved without phases.)
Teachers often discuss the best way to explain wave functions. Some teachers prefer
to use the cloud model only, others prefer not to use any visualization at all. These approaches
are possible; but the most useful and helpful approach is to imagine the state or
wave function of non-relativistic quantum particles as an arrow at every point in space.
The rotation frequency of the arrow is its kinetic energy; the wavelength of the arrow motion
– the period of the helical curve that the tip of the arrows – or of the average arrow
– traces during motion – is the momentum of the quantum particle.
An arrow at each point in space is a field; since the field is concentrated in the region
where the particle is located, and since the amplitude of the field is related to the
probability to find the particle, the wave field, the wave function, is an arrow cloud.
Note that even though the wave function can be seen as defining an arrow at every
point in space, the wave function as a whole can also be described as one, single vector,
Page 222 this time in a Hilbert space. For free particles, the Hilbert space is infinite dimensional!
Nevertheless, it is not hard to calculate in such spaces. The scalar product of two wave
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 83
functions is the spatial integral of the product of the complex conjugate of the first function
and the (unconjugated) second function. With this definition, all vector concepts
(unit vectors, null vectors, basis vectors, etc.) can be meaningfully applied to wave functions.
The state or wave function of a quantum particle is a rotating cloud, more precisely a
wave of rotating arrows. This aspect of a cloud is unusual; since the cloud is made of little
arrows, every point of the cloud is described by a local density and a local orientation.
This latter property does not occur in any cloud of everyday life. Therefore, for many
decades it was tacitly assumed that no simple visualization of such a cloud is possible.
Only the last years have shown that there are visualization for such clouds; one visualization
is presented Vol. VI, page 160 in the last volume of this series.
The state evolution– the Schrödinger equation
The description of the state of a non-relativistic quanton with negligible spin effects as
rotating cloud completely determines how the wave function evolves in time. Indeed, for
such quantum particles the evolution follows from the total energy, the sum of kinetic
and potential energy T + V, and the properties of matter waves:
⊳ The local rate of change of the state arrow ψ is produced by the local total
energy, or Hamiltonian, H = T + V:
iħ
∂
∂t
ψ = Hψ. (31)
This famous equation is Schrödinger’s equation of motion.* This evolution equation applies
to all quantum systems and is one of the high points of modern physics.
Ref. 49 In fact, Erwin Schrödinger had found his equation in two different ways. In his first
Ref. 50 paper, he deduced it from a variational principle. In his second paper, he deduced the
evolution equation directly, by asking a simple question: how does the state evolve? He
knew that the state of a quanton behaves both like a wave and like a particle. A wave is
described by a field, which he denoted ψ(t, x). If the state ψ behaves like a wave, then
the corresponding wave function must be an amplitudeW multiplied by a phase factor
eikx−ωt. The state can thus be written as
ψ(t, x) = W(t, x)eikx−ωt. (32)
The amplitudeW is the length of the local arrow; the phase is the orientation of the local
arrow. Equivalently, the amplitude is the local density of the cloud, and the phase is the
local orientation of the cloud.
* Erwin Schrödinger (b. 1887 Vienna, d. 1961 Vienna) was famous for being a physicien bohémien, always
living in a household with two women. In 1925 he discovered the equation that brought him international
fame, and the Nobel Prize for physics in 1933. He was also the first to show that the radiation discovered
by Victor Hess in Vienna was indeed coming from the cosmos. He left Germany, and then again Austria,
out of dislike for National Socialism, and was a professor in Dublin for many years. There he published his
famous and influential book What is life?. In it, he came close to predicting the then-unknown nucleic acid
DNA from theoretical insight alone.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
84 4 the quantum description of matter
FIGURE 42 Erwin Schrödinger (1887–1961)
We know that the quantum wave must also behave like a particle of mass m. In particular,
the non-relativistic relation between energy and momentum E = p2/2m + V(x)
– where V(x) is the potential at position x – must be fulfilled for these waves.The two
de Broglie relations (21) for matter Page 68 wavelength and frequency then imply
iħ
∂ψ
∂t
= Hψ =
−ħ2
2m
∇2ψ + V(x)ψ. (33)
This is the complete form of Schrödinger’s wave equation. It states how the arrow wave,
thewave function ψ, associated to a particle evolves over time. In 1926, this wave equation
for the complex field ψ became instantly famous when Schrödinger used it, by inserting
the potential felt by an electron near a proton, to calculate the energy levels of the hydrogen
atom. In a hydrogen atom, light is emitted by the single electron inside that atom;
therefore a precise description of the motion of the electron in a hydrogen atom allows
us to describe the light frequencies it can emit. (We will perform the calculation and the
Page 170 comparison with experiment below.) First of all, the Schrödinger equation explained that
only discrete colours are emitted by hydrogen; in addition, the frequencies of the emitted
light were found to be in agreement with the prediction of the equation to five decimal
places.This was an important result, especially if we keep in mind that classical physics
cannot even explain the existence of atoms, let alone their light emission! In contrast,
quantum physics explains all properties of atoms and their colours to high precision. In
other words, the discovery of the quantum of action led the description of the motion of
matter to a new high point.
In fact, the exact description of matter quantons is only found when spin and the relaPage
175 tivistic energy–momentum relation are taken into account. We do this below. No deviations
between relativistic calculations and experiments have ever been found. And even
today, predictions and measurements of atomic spectra remain the most precise and accurate
in the whole study of nature: in the cases that experimental precision allows it, the
calculated values agree with experiments to 13 decimal places.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 85
Self-interference of quantons
Waves interfere. We saw above that all experiments confirm that all quantum particles,
also matter quantons, show interference.The film of Figure 41 shows that interference is
a direct consequence of the Schrödinger equation. The film shows the solution of the
Schrödinger equation for a double slit. The film visualizes how a double slit induces
diffraction and interference.
It turns out that the Schrödinger equation completely reproduces and explains the
observations of matter interference, including Page 69 the examples shown in Figure 35 and
Figure 36: the interference of matter quantons is due to the evolution of rotating clouds.
And like in all interference phenomena, the local intensity of the interference pattern
turns out to be proportional to the square |W|2 of the state amplitude.
We note that even though the wave function is spread out over the whole detection
screen just before it hits the screen, it nevertheless yields only a localized spot on the
screen.This effect, the so-called collapse of the wave function, is explored in detail below.
Page 141
The speed of quantons
Let us delve a little into the details of the description given by the Schrödinger equation
(33).The equation expresses a simple connection: the classical speed of a matter particle
is the group velocity of the wave function ψ. Seen fromfar away, the wave functionmoves
like a classical particle would.
But we know from classical physics that the group velocity is not always well defined:
in cases where the group dissolves in several peaks, the concept of group velocity is not
of much use. These are the cases in which quantum motion is very different from classiPage
141 cal motion, as we will soon discover. But for well-behaved cases, we find that the wave
function moves in the same way as a classical particle does.
The Schrödinger equation makes another point: velocity and position of matter are
not independent variables, and cannot be chosen at will. Indeed, the initial condition of
a systemis given by the initial value of the wave function alone. No derivatives have to be
(or can be) specified. Indeed, experiments confirm that quantum systems are described
by a first-order evolution equation, in stark contrast to classical systems.
Dispersion of quantons
For free quantum particles, the evolution equation implies dispersion, as illustrated in
Figure 43. Imagine a wave function that is localized around a given starting position.
Such a wave function describes a quantum system at rest. When time passes, this wave
function will spread out in space. Indeed, Schrödinger’s evolution equation is similar,
mathematically, to a diffusion equation. In the same way that a drop of ink in water
spreads out, also the state of a localized quantum particle will spread out in space. True,
the most probable position stays unchanged, but the probability to find the particle at
large distances fromthe starting position increases over time. For quantumparticles, this
spreading effect is indeed observed by all experiments. The spread is a consequence of
the wave aspect of matter, and thus of the quantum of action ħ. For macroscopic objects,
the spreading effect is not observed, however: cars rarelymove away fromparking spaces.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
86 4 the quantum description of matter
FIGURE 43 The evolution of a wave
function (lowest curve) with zero
momentum, and the motion of its
parts with positive and negative
momenta. Local phase is encoded in
the colour. (QuickTime film © Bernd
Thaller)
Indeed, quantum theory predicts that for macroscopic systems, the effect of spreading is
negligibly Challenge 63 ny small. Can you show why?
In summary, the wave aspect ofmatter leads to the spreading of wave functions.Wave
functions show dispersion.
Tunnelling and limits on memory – damping of quantons
‘Common sense’ says that a slow ball cannot roll over a high hill.More precisely, classical
physics says that if the kinetic energy T is smaller than the potential energy V that the
ball would have at the top of the hill, then the ball cannot reach the top of the hill. In
contrast, according to quantum theory, there is a positive probability of passing the hill
for any energy of the ball.
In quantumtheory, hills and obstacles are described by potential barriers, and objects
by wave functions. Any initial wave function will spread beyond any potential barrier of
finite height and width. The wave function will also be non-vanishing at the location of
the barrier. In short, any object can overcome any hill or barrier, as shown in Figure 45.
This effect is called the tunnelling effect. It is in complete contrast to everyday experience
– and to classical mechanics.
The tunnelling effect results from a new aspect contained in the quantum description
of hills: the statement that all obstacles in nature can be overcome with a finite effort. No
obstacle is infinitely difficult to surmount. Indeed, only for a potential of infinite height
would the wave function vanish and fail to spread to the other side. But such potentials
exist only as approximations; in nature potentials are always of finite value.
Challenge 64 ny How large is the tunnelling effect? Calculation shows that the transmission probability
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 87
FIGURE 44 The tunnelling of a wave
function through a potential hill (the
rectangular column): most of the
wave function is reflected, and part of
the wave function passes to the
other side. Local phase is encoded in
the colour. (QuickTime film © Bernd
Thaller)
p
E
m
0 Δx
FIGURE 45 Climbing a hill.
P is given approximately by
P ≈ 16T(V − T)
V2 e
−2󰑤
ħ
󵀄2m(V − T)
(34)
where 󰑤 is the width of the hill, 󰑣 its height, and m and T themass and the kinetic energy
of the particle. For a system of large number of particles, the probability is the product
of the probabilities for the different particles.
Let us take the case of a car in a garage, and assume that the car is made of 1028 atoms
at roomtemperature.A typical garage wall has a thickness of 0.1mand a potential height
of V = 1 keV = 160 aJ for the passage of an atom. We get that the probability of finding
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
88 4 the quantum description of matter
the car outside the garage is
P ≈ 󶀣10−(1012)󶀳
(1028)
≈ 10−(1040). (35)
The smallness of this value (just try to write Challenge 65 e it down, to be convinced) is the reason why
it is never taken into account by the police when a car is reported missing. (Actually, the
probability is even considerably smaller. Can you name at least one effect that has been
Challenge 66 ny forgotten in this simple calculation?)
Obviously, tunnelling can be important only for small systems, made of a few particles,
and for thin barriers, with a thickness of the order of ħ/󵀄2m(V − T) . For example,
tunnelling of single atoms is observed in solids at high temperature, but is not important
in daily life. For electrons, the effect is larger: the barrier width 󰑤 for an appreciable
tunnelling effect is
󰑤 ≈ 0.5 nm 󵀂aJ
󵀂V − T
. (36)
At roomtemperature, the kinetic energy T is of the order of 6 zJ; increasing the temperature
obviously increases the tunnelling. As a result, electrons tunnel quite easily through
barriers that are a few atoms in width. Indeed, every TV tube uses tunnelling at high
temperature to generate the electron beam producing the picture. The necessary heating
is the reason why television tubes took some time to switch on.
The tunnelling of electrons also limits the physical size of computer memories.Memory
chips cannot be made arbitrary small. Silicon integrated circuits with one terabyte of
Challenge 67 s random-access memory (RAM) will probably never exist. Can you imagine why? In fact,
tunnelling limits the working of any type of memory, including that of our brain. Indeed,
if we were much hotter than 37°C, we could not remember anything!
Since light is made of particles, it can also tunnel through potential barriers. The best
– or highest – potential barriers for light are mirrors; mirrors have barrier heights of the
order of one attojoule. Tunnelling implies that light can be detected behind any mirror.
These so-called evanescent waves have indeed been detected; they are used in various
high-precision experiments and devices.
The quantum phase
We saw that the amplitude of the wave function, the probability amplitude, shows the
same effects as any wave: dispersion and damping. Let us now explore the phase of the
wave function in more detail.
Whereas the amplitude of a wave function is easy to picture – just think of the (square
root of the) density of a real cloud – the phase takes more effort. States or wave functions
are clouds with a local phase: they are clouds of objects that rotate and can be rotated. In
case of an everyday water cloud, local rotation of droplets has no effect of the cloud. In
contrast, in quantum theory, the local rotation of the cloud, thus the change of its phase,
does have a measurable effect. Let us explore this point.
Page 53 The phase ofmatter waves behaves like the phase of photons: it evolves with time, and
thus increases along the path of a moving particle.The phase can be pictured by a small
rotating arrow.The angular velocity with which the phase rotates is given by the famous
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 89
Farady cage
with high
electric
potential
screen with
intereference
pattern that
depends on
potential
charged matter beam
beam splitter
FIGURE 46 A localized electric potential
in an interferometer leads to a shift of the
interference pattern.
solenoid
with
current screen with
intereference
pattern that
depends on
magnetic field
neutral matter beam
beam splitter
FIGURE 47 Magnetic fields change the
phase of a spinning particle.
relation ω = E/ħ. In short, we can picture the wave function of a free quantum particle as
a moving cloud that rotates with constant frequency but disperses at the same time.
Above all, the phase is that aspect of the wave function that leads to interference effects.
When two partial wave functions are separated and recombined after a relative phase
change, the phase change will determine the interference pattern. This is the origin of
the electron beam interference observations shown in Figure 35. Without the quantum
phase, there would be no extinction and no interference.
The phase of a wave function can be influenced in many ways. The simplest way is
the use of electric fields. If the wave function of a charged particle is split, and one part is
led through a region with an electric field, a phase change will result.The arrangement
is shown in Figure 46. A periodic change of the electric potential yields a periodic shift
of the interference pattern.This is indeed observed.
Another simple case of phase manipulation is shown in Figure 47: also a magnetic
field changes the phase of a spinning charged particle, and thus influences the interference
behaviour.
A famous experiment shows the importance of the phase in an even more surprising
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
90 4 the quantum description of matter
current
vector
potential
magnetic field (even screen
if only inside the solenoid)
charged matter beam
FIGURE 48 The Aharonov–Bohm effect: the influence of the magnetic vector potential on interference
(left) and a measurement confirmation (right), using a microscopic sample that transports electrons in
thin metal wires (© Doru Cuturela).
FIGURE 49 The motion of a wave
function around a solenoid showing the
Aharonov–Bohm effect. The density of
the state is displayed by brightness, and
the local phase is encoded in the colour.
(QuickTime film © Bernd Thaller)
Ref. 51 way: the Aharonov–Bohm effect.The effect is famous because it is counter-intuitive and
because it was predicted before it was observed. Look at the set-up shown in Figure 48.
A matter wave of charged particles is split into two by a cylinder – positioned at a right
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 91
screen with
intereference
pattern that
depends on
wire charge
beam splitter
electrically
charged
wire
polarized neutron beam
FIGURE 50 The Aharonov–Casher effect:
the influence of charge on the phase
leads to interference even for interfering
neutrons.
angle to thematter’s path – and thematterwave recombines behind it. Inside the cylinder
there is a magnetic field; outside, there is none. (A simple way to realize such a cylinder is
a long solenoid.) Quantumphysics predicts that an interference pattern will be observed,
and that the position of the stripes will depend on the value of the magnetic field. This
happens even though the wave never enters the region with the field! The surprising
effect has been observed in countless experiments.
The reason for the Aharonov–Bohm effect is simple: for a charged particle, the phase
of a wave function is determined by the vector potential A, not by the magnetic field B.
The vector potential around a solenoid does not vanish, as we know from the section on
Vol. III, page 76 electrodynamics, but circulates around the solenoid. This circulation distinguishes the
two sides of the solenoid and leads to a phase shift – one that indeed depends on the
magnetic field value – and thus produces interference, even though the particle never
interacts with the magnetic field.
A further example for phase manipulation is the so-called Aharonov–Casher effect,
which even occurs for neutral particles, as long as they have a magnetic moment, such as
neutrons have.The phase of a polarized neutron will be influenced by an electric field, so
that the arrangement shown in Figure 50 will show an interference pattern that depends
on the applied electric potential.
Another case of phasemanipulation will be presented later on: also gravitational fields
can be used to rotate wave functions. In fact, even the acceleration due to rotational
motion can do so. In fact, it has been possible to measure the rotation of the Earth by
Ref. 52 observing the change of neutron beam interference patterns.
Another important class of experiments that manipulate the phase of wave functions
are possible with macroscopic quantum phenomena. In superconductivity and in superfluidity,
the phase of the wave function is regularly manipulated with magnetic and electric
fields. This possibility has many important technical applications. For example, the
so-called Josephson effect is used to measure electric potential differences by measuring
the frequency of emitted radio waves, and so-called superconducting quantum interference
devices, or SQIDs, are used to measure tiny magnetic fields.
We note that all these experiments confirm that the absolute phase of a wave function
cannot bemeasured. However, relative phases – phase differences or phase changes – can
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
924 the quantum description of matter
be measured. Challenge 68 e Can you confirm this?
All the phase shift effects just explained have been observed in numerous experiments.
The phase is an essential aspect of the wave function: the phase leads to interference and
is the main reason for calling it wave function in the first place. Like in any wave, the
phase evolves over time and it can be influenced by various external influences. Above
all, the experiments show that a localized quantum particle – thus when the spread of
the wave function can be neglected – is best imagined as a rotating arrow; if the spread
cannot be neglected, the wave function is best imagined as a wave of arrows rotating at
each point in space.
Can two photons interfere?
Page 55 In 1930, Paul Dirac made a famous statement already mentioned earlier on:
Each photon interferes only with itself. Interference between two different
Ref. 53 photons never occurs.
Often this statement is misinterpreted as implying that two separate photon sources cannot
interfere. It is almost unbelievable how this false interpretation has spread through
Ref. 54 the literature. Everybody can check that this statement is incorrect with a radio: two distant
radio stations transmitting on the same frequency lead to beats in amplitude, i.e.,
to wave interference. (This should not to be confused with the more common radio interference,
with usually is simply a superposition of intensities.) Radio transmitters are
coherent sources of photons, and any radio receiver shows that two such sources can
indeed interfere.
In 1949, interference of two different photon sources has been demonstrated with
microwave beams. From the nineteen fifties onwards, numerous experiments with two
lasers and even with two thermal light sources have shown light interference . For examRef.
55 ple, in 1963, Magyar and Mandel used two ruby lasers emitting light pulses and a rapid
shutter camera to produce spatial interference fringes. However, all these experimental
results with two sources do not contradict the statement by Dirac. Indeed, two photons
cannot interfere for several reasons.
— Interference is a result of the space-time propagation of waves; photons appear only
when the energy–momentum picture is used, mainly when interaction with matter
takes place. The description of space-time propagation and the particle picture are
mutually exclusive – this is one aspect of the complementary principle. Why does
Dirac seem to mix the two in his statement? Dirac employs the term ‘photon’ in a
very general sense, as quantized state of the electromagnetic field. When two coherent
beams are superposed, the quantized entities, the photons, cannot be ascribed to
either of the sources. Interference results from superposition of two coherent states,
not of two particles.
— Interference is only possible if one cannot know where the detected photon comes
from.The quantum mechanical description of the field in a situation of interference
never allows ascribing photons of the superposed field to one of the sources. In other
words, if you can say from which source a detected photon comes from, you cannot
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 93
FIGURE 51 An electron hologram of DNA molecules (© Hans-Werner Fink/Wiley VCH).
observe interference.
— Interference between two beams requires a fixed phase between them, i.e., an uncertain
particle number; in other words, interference is only possible if the photon
number for each of the two beams is unknown.
A better choice of words is to say that interference is always between two (indistinguishable)
states, or if one prefers, between two possible (indistinguishable) histories,
but never between two particles. In summary we can say: two different electromagnetic
beams can interfere, but two different photons cannot.
Can two electron beams interfere? Are there coherent electron
beams?
Do coherent electron sources exist?The question is tricky.
Ref. 56 Results in the literature, such as the one illustrated in Figure 51, state that is possible
to make holograms with electron beams.* However, when one asks these authors about
the meaning of coherence, they answer that electron coherence is only transversal, not
longitudinal. Transversal coherence is determined by the possible size of wavefrontswith
a given phase. Theupper limit of this size is given by the interactions such a state has with
its environment. All this behaviour is as expected for actual coherence.
However, the concept of ‘transversal coherence’ is a misnomer. The ability to interfere
with oneself, as implies in the term ‘transversal coherence’ is not the correct definition of
coherence. Transversal coherence, be it for photons or formatter particles, only expresses
the smallness of the particle source. Both small lamps (and lasers) can show interference
when the beam is split and recombined with identical path length; this is not a proof of
Ref. 57 * In 2002, the first holograms have been produced that made use of neutron beams.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
94 4 the quantum description of matter
coherence of the light field. A similar reasoning shows that monochromaticity is not a
proof for coherence either.
A state is called coherent if it possesses a well-defined phase throughout a given domain
of space or time. The size of the spatial region or of the time interval defines the
degree of coherence.This definition yields coherence lengths of the order of the source
size for small ‘incoherent’ sources. Even for a small coherence length, the size of an interference
pattern or the distance d between its maxima can be much larger than the
coherence length l or the source size s. In short, a large size (or a persistent duration in
time) of an interference pattern alone is not a proof of coherence.
A light source is coherent if it produces an approximate sine wave over a certain length
or time. Due to the indeterminacy relation, in any coherent beam of light, the photon
Page 46 number is undetermined.The same requirement applies to coherent electron beams: an
undetermined electron number is needed to see amacroscopic interference pattern.That
is impossible, as electrons (at usual energies) carry a conserved charge. Coherent electron
beams do not exist.
In summary, even though an electron can interfere with itself, and even though it is
possible to produce interference between two light sources, interference between two
electron sources is impossible. Indeed, nobody has every managed to produce interference
between two electron sources. There is no conventional concept of coherence for
electron beams.
The least action principle in quantum physics
In nature, motion happens in a way that minimizes change. Indeed, in classical physics,
Vol. I, page 219 the principle of least action states that in nature, the motion of a particle happens along
that particular path – out of all possible paths with the same end points – for which the
action is minimal. This principle of cosmic laziness was stated mathematically by saying
that in nature, the variation δS of the action is zero. Change minimization explains all
classical evolution equations.We now transfer this idea to the quantum domain.
For quantum systems, we need to redefine both the concept of action and the concept
of variation: first of all, we to find a description of action that is based on operators;
secondly, we need to define the action variation without paths, as the concept of ‘path’
does not exist for quantum systems; thirdly, since there is a smallest action in nature, a
vanishing variation is not a clearly defined concept, and we must overcome this hurdle.
There are two main ways to achieve this: to describe the motion of quantum systems as a
superposition of all possible paths, or to describe action with the help of wave functions.
Both approaches are equivalent.
In the first approach, the path integral formulation, the motion of a quantum particle
is described as a democratic superposition ofmotions along all possible paths. (We called
Page 53 it the ‘arrow model’ above.) For each path, the evolution of the arrow is determined, and
at the end point, the arrows from all paths are added. The action for each path is the
number of turns that the arrow performs along the path. The result from this exercise
is that the path for which the arrow makes the smallest number of turns is usually (but
not always!) the most probable path. A more precise investigation shows that classical,
macroscopic systems always follow only the path of smallest action, whereas quantum
systems follow all paths.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 95
In the second approach to quantum physics, action is defined with help of wave functions.
In classical physics, we defined the action (or change) as the integral of the Lagrangian
between the initial and final points in time, and the Lagrangian itself as the
difference between kinetic Vol. I, page 215 and potential energy. In quantum physics, the simplest definition
is the quantum action defined by Julian Schwinger. Let us call the initial and final
states of the system ψi and ψf. The action S between these two states is defined as
S = ⟨ψi | 󵐐 L dt | ψf ⟩, (37)
where L is the Lagrangian (operator).The angle brackets represent the ‘multiplication’ of
states and operators as defined in quantum theory. (We skip the details of notation and
mathematics here.) In simple words, also in quantum theory, action – i.e., the change
occurring in a system – is the integral of the Lagrangian. The Lagrangian operator L is
defined in the same way as in classical physics: the Lagrangian L = T −V is the difference
between the kinetic energy T and the potential energy V operators.The only difference
is that, in quantum theory, the momentum and position variables of classical physics are
replaced by the corresponding operators of quantum physics.*
To transfer the concept of action variation δS to the quantum domain, Julian
Schwinger introduced the straightforward expression
δS = ⟨ψi | δ󵐐 L dt| ψf ⟩. (38)
The concept of path is not needed in this expression, as the variation of the action is
based on varying wave functions instead of varying particle paths.
The last classical requirement to be transferred to the quantum domain is that, because
nature is lazy, the variation of the action must vanish. However, in the quantum
domain, the variation of the action cannot be zero, as the smallest observable action is
the quantum of action. As Julian Schwinger discovered, there is only one possible way to
express the required minimality of action:
δS = ⟨ψi | δ󵐐 L dt| ψf⟩ = −iħ δ⟨ψi|ψf ⟩. (39)
This so-called quantum action principle describes all motion in the quantum domain.
Classically, the right-hand side is zero – since ħ is taken to be zero – and we then recover
the minimum-action principle δS = 0 of classical physics. But in quantum theory, whenever
we try to achieve small variations, we encounter the quantumof action and changes
of (relative) phase. This is expressed by the right-hand side of the expression.The right
side is the reason that the evolution equations for the wave function – Schrödinger’s equation
for the spinless non-relativistic case, or Dirac’s equation for the spin 1/2 relativistic
case – are valid in nature.
In simple words, all quantum motion – i.e., the quantum evolution of a state ψ or |ψ⟩
* More precisely, there is also a condition governing the ordering of operators in a mixed product, so that
the non-commutativity of operators is taken into account. We do not explore this issue here.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
96 4 the quantum description of matter
– happens in such a way that the action variation is the same as −i times the quantum
of action ħ times the variation of the scalar product between initial and final states. In
other words, in the actual motion, the intermediate states are fixed by the requirement
that they must lead from the initial state to the final state with the smallest number of
effective turns of the state phase. The factor −i expresses the dependence of the action
on the rotation of the wave function.
In summary, the least action principle is also valid in quantum physics, provided one
takes into account that action values below ħ cannot be found in experiments.The least
action principle governs the evolution of wave function, and thus explains the colour of
all things, all other material science, all chemistry and all biology, as we will see in the
following.
The motion of quantons with spin
“Everything turns. Anonymous”
What is the origin of the quantum phase? Classical physics helps to answer the question.
Page 75 Quantons can rotate around an axis: we speak of particle spin. But if quantum particles
can spin, they should possess angular momentum. And indeed, experiments confirm
this deduction.
In particular, electrons have spin.The full details of electron spin were deduced from
Ref. 58 experiments by two Dutch students, George Uhlenbeck and Samuel Goudsmit, in 1925.
They had the guts to publish what Ralph Kronig had also suspected: that electrons rotate
around an axis with a projected component of the angular momentum given by ħ/2. In
fact, this value – often called spin 1/2 for short – is valid for all elementary matter particles.
(In contrast, all known elementary radiation particles have spin values of ħ, or spin 1 for
short.)
If a spinning particle has angularmomentum, it must be possible to rearrange the axis
by applying a torque, to observe precession, to transfer the spin in collisions etc.All this is
Page 76 indeed observed; in fact, the Stern–Gerlach experiment allows all these observations.The
only difference between particle spin and classical angular momentum is that particle
Page 75 spin is quantized, as we deduced above.
In other words, the spin of a quantum particle has all the properties of a rotation
around an axis. One result of spin is that charged quantum particles also act as small
dipole magnets, with the magnet oriented along the axis of rotation. The observed
strength of the dipole magnet, the magnetic moment, cannot be deduced from classical
physics.Themagneticmoment is proportional to the spin and to the standard conversion
factor −e/2me; the quantum effects are then described by the so-called д-value, which is
a pure number:
μ = д
−e
2me
L = −дμB
Lħ
, with μB = eħ
2me
. (40)
In order to explain the observed optical spectra, Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit deduced a д-
Page 99 value of 2 for the electron in order to explain the optical spectra.This value was explained
Ref. 59 by LlewellynThomas as a relativistic effect a few months later.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 97
By 2004, experimental techniques had become so sensitive that the magnetic effect
of a single electron spin attached to an impurity (in an otherwise non-magnetic material)
could be detected. Researchers now hope to improve these so-called ‘magneticresonance-
force microscopes’ until they reach atomic resolution.
In 1927, the Austrian physicistWolfgang Pauli* discovered how to include spin 1/2 in
a quantum-mechanical description: instead of a state function described by a single complex
number, a state function with two complex components is needed. The reason for
this expansion is simple. In general, the little rotating arrow that describes a quantum
state does not rotate around a fixed plane, as is assumed by the Schrödinger equation;
the plane of rotation has also to be specified at each position in space.This implies that
two additional parameters are required at each space point, bringing the total number
of parameters to four real numbers, or, equivalently, two complex numbers. Nowadays,
Pauli’s equation is mainly of conceptual interest, because – like that of Schrödinger – it
does not comply with special relativity. However, the idea of including the local rotation
plane remains valid. The idea was used by Dirac when he introduced the relativistic description
of the electron, and the idea is also used in all other wave equations for particles
with spin.
In summary, the description of a quanton with spin implies the use of wave functions
that specify two complex numbers at each point in space and time.
Relativistic wave equations
In 1899,Max Planck had discovered the quantum of action. In 1905, Albert Einstein published
the theory of special relativity, which was based on the idea that the speed of light
c is independent of the speed of the observer. The first question Planck asked himself
was whether the value of the quantum of action would be independent of the speed of
the observer. It was his interest in this question that led him to invite Einstein to Berlin.
With this invitation, he made the patent-office clerk famous in the world of physics.
Experiments show that the quantum of action is indeed independent of the speed of
the observer. All observers find the same minimum value. To include special relativity
into quantum theory, we therefore only need to find the correct quantum Hamiltonian
H.
Given that the classical Hamiltonian of a free particle and antiparticle is given by
H = ±󵀆c4m2 + c2p2 with p = γm󰑣, (41)
*Wolfgang Ernst Pauli (b. 1900Vienna, d. 1958 Zürich), at the age of 21, wrote one of the best texts on special
and general relativity. He was the first to calculate the energy levels of hydrogen using quantum theory,
discovered the exclusion principle, incorporated spin into quantum theory, elucidated the relation between
spin and statistics, proved the CPT theorem, and predicted the neutrino.He was admired for his intelligence,
and feared for his biting criticisms, which led to his nickname, ‘conscience of physics’. Despite this, he helped
many people in their research, such as Heisenberg with quantum theory, without claiming any credit for
Ref. 60 himself. He was seen by many, including Einstein, as the greatest and sharpest mind of twentieth-century
physics. He was also famous for the ‘Pauli effect’, i.e., his ability to trigger disasters in laboratories, machines
and his surroundings by hismere presence. As we will see shortly, one can argue that Pauli actually received
the Nobel Prize for physics in 1945 (officially ‘for the discovery of the exclusion principle’) for finally settling
the question of how many angels can dance on the tip of a pin.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
98 4 the quantum description of matter
one might ask: what is the corresponding Hamilton operator?The simplest answer was
given, in 1949 by T.D. Newton and E.P. Wigner, and in 1950, by L.L. Foldy and S.A.
Ref. 61 Wouthuysen.The operator is almost the same one:
H = β󵀆c4m2 + c2p2 with β = 󶀫
1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 −1 0
0 0 0 −1
󶀻. (42)
The signs appearing in thematrix operator β distinguish between particles and antiparticles.
The numbers +1 and −1 appear twice, to take care of the twopossible spin directions
for each case.
With this relativistic Hamiltonian operator for spin 1/2 particles – and with all others
– the wave function is described by four complex numbers, two for particles and two
for antiparticles. That each type of particles requires two complex components follows
from the requirement to specify, at each point in space, the length of the arrow, its phase,
Vol. II, page 67 and its plane of rotation. Long ago we also found that relativity automatically introduces
Page 179 antimatter, and we will explore the issue in detail below. Both matter and antimatter are
part of any relativistic description of quantum effects. The wave function for a particle
has vanishing antiparticle components, and vice versa. In total, the wave function for
relativistic spin 1/2 systems has thus four complex components.
The Hamilton operator yields the velocity operator 󰑣 through the same relation that
is valid in classical physics:
󰑣 = d
dt
x = β p
󵀆c4m2 + c2p2
. (43)
This velocity operator shows a continuum of eigenvalues, from minus to plus the speed
of light.The velocity 󰑣 is a constant of motion, as are the momentum p and the energy
E = 󵀆c4m2 + c2p2. (44)
Also the orbital angular momentum L is defined as in classical physics, through
L = x × p. (45)
Ref. 62 The orbital angular momentum L and the spin σ are separate constants of motion. A
particle (or antiparticle) with positive (or negative) angular momentum component has
a wave function with only one non-vanishing component; the other three components
vanish.
But alas, the representation of relativistic motion given by Foldy and Wouthuysen is
not the simplest when it comes to take electromagnetic interactions into account. The
simple identity between the classical and quantum-mechanical descriptions is lost when
electromagnetismis included.We will solve this problembelow, when we explore Dirac’s
Page 176 evolution equation for relativistic wave functions.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 99
Composite vs. elementary quantons
When is an object composite, and not elementary? Quantum theory gives several pragmatic
answers.The first one is somewhat strange: an object is composite when its gyromagnetic
ratio is different Ref. 63 from the one predicted by QED. The gyromagnetic ratio γ is
defined as the ratio between the magnetic moment M and the angular momentum L:
M = γL. (46)
The gyromagnetic ratio γ is measured in units of s−1T−1, i.e., C/kg, and determines the
energy levels of magnetic spinning particles in magnetic fields; it will reappear later in
Vol. V, page 145 the context of magnetic resonance imaging. All candidates for elementary particles have
spin 1/2. The gyromagnetic ratio for spin-1/2 particles of magnetic momentM andmass
m can be written as
γ = M
ħ/2
= д e
2m
. (47)
The criterion for being elementary can thus be reduced to a condition on the value of the
dimensionless number д, the so-called д-factor. (The expression eħ/2m is often called
the magneton of the particle.) If the д-factor differs from the value predicted by QED for
point particles – about 2.0 – the object is composite. For example, a 4He+ helium ion has
spin 1/2 and a д value of 14.7 ⋅ 103 . Indeed, the radius of the heliumion is 3 ⋅ 10−11 m,
obviously a finite value, and the ion is a composite entity. For the proton, one measures
a д-factor of about 5.6. Indeed, experiments yield a finite proton radius of about 0.9 fm
and show that it contains several constituents.
The neutron, which has a magnetic moment despite being electrically neutral, must
therefore be composite. Indeed, its radius is approximately the same as that of the proton.
Similarly, molecules, mountains, stars and people must be composite. According to this
first criterion, the only elementary particles are leptons (i.e., electrons, muons, tauons
and neutrinos), quarks, and intermediate bosons (i.e., photons,W-bosons, Z-bosons and
Vol. V, page 145 gluons). More details on these particles will be revealed in the chapters on the nucleus.
Another simple criterion for compositeness has just been mentioned: any object with
ameasurable size is composite.This criterion yields the same list of elementary particles as
the first. Indeed, the two criteria are related.The simplestmodel for composite structures
Ref. 64 predicts that the д-factor obeys
д − 2 = R
λC
(48)
where R is the radius and λC = h/mc is the Compton wavelength of the system. This
expression is surprisingly precise for helium-4 ions, helium-3, tritium ions and protons,
VCohl.aVll,epnaggee63916e as you may wish to check.The tables in Appendix B in the next volume make the same
point.
A third criterion for compositeness ismore general: any object larger than its Compton
length is composite. The argument is simple. An object is composite if one can detect
internal motion, i.e.,motion of some components. Now the action of any part with mass
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
100 4 the quantum description of matter
mpart moving inside a composed system of size r obeys
Spart < 2πr mpart c < πr m c (49)
where m is the mass of the composite object. On the other hand, following the principle
of quantum theory, this action, to be observable, must be larger than ħ/2. Inserting this
condition, we find that for any composite object*
r > ħ
2πm c
. (50)
The right-hand side differs only by a factor 4π2 fromthe so-called Compton (wave)length
λ = h
m c
(51)
of an object.Thus any object larger than its own Compton wavelength is composite; and
any object smaller than the right-hand side of expression (50) is elementary. Again, only
leptons, quarks and intermediate bosons pass the test. All other objects are composite.
This third criterion produces the same list as the previous Challenge 71 ny ones. Can you explain why?
A fourth criterion is regularly cited by Steven Weinberg: a particle is elementary if it
appears in the Lagrangian of the standard model of particle physics. Can you show that
Challenge 72 s this criterion follows from the previous ones?
Interestingly, we are not yet finished with this topic. Even stranger statements about
Vol. VI, page 281 compositeness will appear when gravity is taken into account. Just be patient: it is
worth it.
Curiosities and fun challenges about quantum motion of matter
Take the sharpest knife edge or needle tip you can think of: the quantumof action implies
that they are all fuzzy clouds.
∗∗
Do hydrogen atoms exist?Most types of atom have been imaged with microscopes, photographed
under illumination, levitated one by one, and evenmovedwith needles, one by
one, as the picture on page 297 in volume I shows. Researchers have even moved single
Ref. 65 atoms by using laser beams to push them. However, not a single one of these experiments
has measured or imaged hydrogen atoms. Is that a reason to doubt the existence
Challenge 73 s of hydrogen atoms? Taking this not-so-serious discussion seriously can be a lot of fun.
∗∗
Is the wave function ’real’? More precisely, is the wave function really a cloud? Some
physicists still doubt this.This dying group of physicists, often born around the middle
of the twentieth century, have heard so often – incorrectly and usually fromquestionable
Challenge 70 ny * Can you find the missing factor of 2? And is the assumption that the components must always be lighter
than the composite a valid one?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
4 the quantum description of matter 101
FIGURE 52 A special potential well
that does not disturb a wave function.
Colour indicates phase. (QuickTime
film © Bernd Thaller)
authorities – that a wave function has no reality that they stopped asking and answering
the simplest questions. Challenge 74 e To dispel their doubts, ask them whether they have a non-zero
height or whether they think that atoms are round. If they agree, they have admitted
that wave functions have some sort of reality. All everyday objects are made of point-like
elementary particles.The size, surface area and volume of everyday objects are therefore
exclusively due to wave functions. Every length, area and volume is a proof that wave
functions have some sort of reality.
∗∗
Two observables can commute for two different reasons: either they are very similar –
such as the coordinates x and x2 – or they are very different – such as the coordinate x
Challenge 75 ny and the momentum py. Can you give an explanation for this?
∗∗
Space and time translations commute. Why then do the momentum operator and the
Challenge 76 ny Hamiltonian not commute in general?
∗∗
There are some potentials that have no influence on a wave function. Figure 52 shows
an example. This potential has reflection coefficient zero for all energies; the scattered
wave has no reflected part. The well has the shape of a soliton of the Korteweg–de Vries
equation, which is related to the Schrödinger equation.
∗∗
For a bound system in a non-relativistic state with no angular momentum, one has the
Ref. 66 relation
⟨r2⟩ ⟨T⟩ ⩾ 9ħ2
8m
, (52)
where m is the reduced mass and T the kinetic energy of the components, and r is the
Challenge 77 s size of the system. Can you deduce this result, and check it for hydrogen?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1024 the quantum description of matter
∗∗
One often reads that the universe might have been born from a quantum fluctuation.
Can you explain Challenge 78 ny why this statement make no sense?
A summary on motion of quantons
In summary, the motion of quantons can be described in two ways:
— Seen from far away, at low magnification, moving quantum particles behave as advancing,
rotating and precessing arrows.The details of the rotation and precession of
the arrow depend on the energy and momentum of the particle.The squared length
of the arrow is the probability to observe a particle. If a particle can get froma starting
point to a final point in several ways, arrows add up.
— At large magnification, quantum particles are described by wave functions that move
like advancing, rotating and precessing clouds. The local cloud orientation, the local
phase, follows a wobbling motion. The square of the probability amplitude, the
density of the cloud, is the probability for finding the particle at a given spot.
Rotating arrows result from cloud averages; they combine particle and wave properties.
A full rotation of the arrow corresponds to the quantumof action.This central feature implies
that a non-relativistic particle whose spin can be neglected follows the Schrödinger
equation, and that a relativistic electron follows the Dirac equation.The Dirac equation
agrees with all known experiments. In particular, the Dirac equation describes all of
chemistry and biology, as we will find out.
To continue with the greatest efficiency on our path across quantum physics, we explore
three important topics: the issue of indistinguishability of several particles, the topic
of spin, and the issue of the interpretation of the probabilities.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
Cha p t e r 5
PERMUTATION OF PARTICLES – ARE
PARTICLES LIKE GLOVES?
Why are we able to distinguish twins from each other?Why can we distinguish
hat looks alike, such as a copy from an original?Most of us are convinced that
henever we compare an original with a copy, we can find a difference. This
conviction turns out to be correct, but the conclusion is not straightforward.
The quantum of action has many implications for copies and their differences from
the original. Think about any method that allows you to distinguish objects: you will
find that it runs into trouble for Challenge 79 s point-like particles.Therefore, in the quantum domain
something must change about our ability to distinguish particles and objects.
One could argue that differences between an original object and a copy can always be
made to disappear: it should be sufficient to use the same number and type of atoms. In
fact, the quantum of action shows that this is not sufficient, even though all atoms of the
same type are indeed indistinguishable copies of each other! In the following we explore
the most important consequences on motion of the indistinguishability of atoms and of
the distinguishability of macroscopic objects.
Distinguishing macroscopic objects
A number of important properties of objects are highlighted by studying a combinatorial
puzzle: the glove problem. It asks:
How many surgical gloves (for the right hand) are necessary if m doctors
need to operate 󰑤 patients in a hygienic way, so that nobody gets in contact
with the body fluids of anybody else?
The same problem also appears in other settings. For example, it also applies to computRef.
67 ers, interfaces and computer viruses or to condoms,men and women – and is then called
the condom problem. To be clear, the optimal number of gloves is not the product m󰑤.
In fact, the problem has three subcases.
Challenge 80 s — The simple case m = 󰑤 = 2 already provides the most important ideas needed. Are
you able to find the optimal solution and procedure?
— Inthecase 󰑤 = 1 and m odd or the case m = 1 and 󰑤 odd, the solution is (m + 1)/2
Challenge 81 e gloves.This is the optimal solution, as you can easily check yourself.
Ref. 68 — A solution with a simple procedure for all other cases is given by ⌈2󰑤/3+m/2⌉ gloves,
where ⌈x⌉ means the smallest integer greater than or equal to x. For example, for two
doctors and three patients this gives only three gloves. (However, this formula does
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
104 5 permutation of particles
not always give the optimal solution; better Challenge 82 e values exist in certain subcases.)
Enjoy the puzzle.
Two basic properties of gloves determine the solution to the puzzle. First, gloves have
two sides, an interior and an exterior one, that can be distinguished from each other.
Secondly, gloves turned inside out exchange left and right. Thirdly, gloves can also be
distinguished fromeach other.Do these three properties also apply to quantumparticles?
We will discuss the issue of double-sidedness of quantum particles in the last part of
Vol. VI, page 105 themountain ascent. In fact, the question whether particles can be turned inside out will
be of importance for their description and their motion. We will also discuss the differVol.
V, page 222 ence between right- and left-handed particles in our adventure. In the present chapter
we concentrate on the third issue, namely whether objects and particles can always be
distinguished from copies. In fact, elementary particles do not behave like gloves but in
an even more surprising manner.
In everyday life, distinction of macroscopic objects can be achieved in two ways. We
are able to distinguish objects – or people – from each other because they differ in their
intrinsic properties, such as their mass, colour, size or shape. In addition, we are also able
to distinguish objects if they have the same intrinsic properties. Any game of billiard
suggests that by following the path of each ball, we can distinguish it fromthe other balls.
In short, objects with identical properties can also be distinguished using their state.
The state of a billiard ball is given by its position and momenta. In the case of billiard
balls, the state allows distinguishing balls because themeasurement error for the position
of each ball is much smaller than the size of the ball itself. However, in the microscopic
domain this is not the case. Let us take single atoms. Atoms of the same type have the
same intrinsic properties. To distinguish them in collisions, we would need to keep track
of theirmotion. But we have no chance to achieve this. Already in the nineteenth century
it was shown experimentally that even nature itself is not able to do it! This profound
result was discovered studying systems which incorporate a large number of colliding
atoms of the same type: gases.
Distinguishing atoms
Vol. I, page 341 The calculation of the entropy S of a simple gas, made of N simple particles of mass m
moving in a volume V, gives
S
kN
= ln 󶁤 V
Λ3󶁴 + 3
2
+ ln α
N
(53)
where k is the Boltzmann constant, ln the natural logarithm, T the temperature, and
Λ = 󵀄2πħ2/mkT is the thermal wavelength (approximately the de Broglie wavelength
of the particles making up the gas). In this formula, the pure number α is equal to 1 if
the particles are distinguishable like billiard balls, and equal to 1/N! if they are not distinguishable
at all. Measuring the entropy thus allows us to determine α and therefore
to test experimentally whether particles are distinguishable. It turns out that only the
second case describes nature. This can easily be checked without even performing the
Challenge 83 e measurement: only in the second case, α = 1/N! does the entropy of two volumes of
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
5 permutation of particles 105
FIGURE 53 Willard Gibbs (1839–1903)
identical gas add up.* The result, often called Gibbs’ paradox,** thus proves that the microscopic
components Ref. 69 of matter are indistinguishable: in a system of quantum particles
– be they electrons, protons, atoms or small molecules – there is no way to say which
particle is which.
Indistinguishability is an experimental property of nature.*** Since ħ appears in the
expression for the entropy, indistinguishability is a quantum effect. On the other hand,
indistinguishability plays no role if quantum effects are negligible. But in practice, all
everyday matter – plasma, gases, liquids and solids – shows strong quantum effects.
The properties of matter would be completely different without indistinguishability.
For example, we will discover that without it, knifes and swords would not cut. In addition,
the soil would not carry us; we would fall right through it. To illuminate the issue
in more detail, we explore the following question.
Why does indistinguishability appear in nature?
Take two quantum particles with the same mass, the same composition and the same
shape, such as two atoms. Imagine that their paths cross, and that they approach each
other to small distances at the crossing, as shown in Figure 54. In a gas, both a collision
of atoms or a near miss are examples. Now, all experiments ever performed show that at
small distances it is impossible to say whether the two quantons have switched roles or
not.
* Indeed, the entropy values observed by experiment, for a monoatomic gas, are given by the so-called
Challenge 84 d Sackur–Tetrode formula
S
kN
= ln 󶁤 V
NΛ3󶁴 + 5
2
(54)
which follows when α = 1/N! is inserted above. It was deduced independently by the German physicistOtto
Sackur (1880–1914) and the Dutch physicist Hugo Tetrode (1895–1931). Note that the essential parameter is
the ratio between V/N, the volume per particle, and Λ3, the de Broglie volume of a particle.
** JosiahWillard Gibbs (1839–1903), US-American physicist who was, withMaxwell and Planck, one of the
three founders of statistical mechanics and thermodynamics; he introduced the concept of ensemble and
the term thermodynamic phase.
***When radioactivity was discovered, people thought that it contradicted the indistinguishability of atoms,
because decay seems to single out certain atoms compared to others. But quantum theory then showed that
this is not the case and that even atoms and molecules are indistinguishable.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
106 5 permutation of particles
m
m
FIGURE 54 Identical objects with
crossing paths.
⊳ It is impossible in a gas to follow quantum particles moving around and to
determine which one is which.
The impossibility to distinguish nearby particles is a direct consequence of the quantum
of action. For a path that brings two approaching particles very close to each other, a
role switch requires only a small amount of change, i.e., only a small (physical) action.
However, we know that there is a smallest observable action in nature. Keeping track
of each quantum particle at small distances would require action values smaller than
the smallest action observed in nature.The existence of a smallest action thus makes it
impossible to keep track of quantum particles when they come too near to each other.
Any description of systems with several quantons must thus take into account that after
a close encounter, it is impossible to say which quanton is which.
If we remember that quantumtheory describes quantons as clouds, the indistinguishability
appearsmore natural.Whenever two cloudsmeet and depart again, it is impossible
to say which cloud is which. On the other hand, if two particles are kept distant enough,
one does have an effective distinguishability; indistinguishability thus appears only when
the particles come close.
In short, indistinguishability is a natural, unavoidable consequence of the existence of
a smallest action value in nature.This result leads straight away to the next question:
Can quantum particles be counted?
In everyday life, objects can be counted because they can be distinguished. Since quantum
particles cannot always be distinguished, we need some care in determining how
to count them. The first step in counting particles is the definition of what is meant by
a situation without any particle at all. This seems an easy thing to do, but later on we
will encounter situations where already this step runs into difficulties. In any case, the
first step is thus the specification of the vacuum. Any counting method requires that the
situation without particles is clearly separated from situations with particles.
The second step is the specification of an observable useful for determining quantum
particle number.The easiest way is to chose one of those quantumnumbers which add up
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
5 permutation of particles 107
under composition, such as electric charge.* Counting is then performed by measuring
the total charge and dividing by the unit charge.
This method has several advantages. First of all, it is not important whether the particles
are distinguishable or not; counting always works. Secondly, virtual particles are not
counted.This is a welcome state Vol. V, page 111 of affairs, as we will see, because for virtual particles, i.e.,
particles for which E2 ̸= p2c2 + m2c4, there is no way to define a particle number anyway.
This is the best particle counting method possible.
The side effect of the countingmethod is that antiparticles count negatively! Also this
consequence is a result of the quantum of action. We saw above that the quantum of
action implies that even in vacuum, particle–antiparticle pairs are observed at sufficiently
high energies. As a result, an antiparticle must count as minus one particle. In other
words, any way of counting quantum particles can produce an error due to this effect. In
everyday life this limitation plays no role, as there is no antimatter around us.The issue
does play a role at higher energies, however. It turns out that there is no general way to
count the exact number of particles and antiparticles separately; only the sum can be
defined. In short, quantum theory shows that particle counting is never perfect.
In summary, nature does provide a way to count quantumparticles even if they cannot
be distinguished, though only for everyday, low energy conditions; due to the quantum
of action, antiparticles count negatively.Antiparticles thus provide a limit to the counting
of particles at high energies, when the mass–energy equivalence becomes important.
What is permutations ymmetry?
Since quantum particles are countable but indistinguishable, there exists a symmetry of
nature for systems composed of several identical quantons. Permutation symmetry, also
called exchange symmetry, is the property of nature that observations are unchanged under
exchange of identical particles. Permutation symmetry forms one of the four pillars
of quantum theory, together with space-time symmetry, gauge symmetry and the
not yet encountered renormalization symmetry. Permutation symmetry is a property of
composed systems, i.e., of systems made of many (identical) subsystems. Only for such
systems does indistinguishability play a role.
In otherwords, ‘indistinguishable’ is not the same as ‘identical’. Two quantum particles
of the same type are not the same; they are more like copies of each other. On the other
hand, everyday life experience shows us that two copies can always be distinguished under
close inspection, so that the term ‘copy’ is not fully appropriate either.
⊳ Quantons, quantum particles, are countable and completely indistinguishable.**
Quantum particles are perfect copies of each other.
Being perfect copies, not even nature can distinguish particles, and permutation symmetry
appears.
* In everyday life, the weight or mass is commonly used as observable. However, it cannot be used in the
quantum domain, except for simple cases. Can you give at least two reasons, one from special relativity and
Challenge 85 s one from general relativity?
** The word ‘indistinguishable’ is so long that many physicists sloppily speak of ‘identical’ particles nevertheless.
Take care.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
108 5 permutation of particles
In the next chapter, we will discover that permutation is partial rotation. Permutation
symmetry thus is a symmetry under partial rotations. Challenge 86 e Can you find out why?
Indistinguishability and wave function symmetry
The indistinguishability of quantum particles leads to important conclusions about the
description of their state of motion. This happens because it is impossible to formulate
a description of motion that includes indistinguishability right from the start. (Are you
Challenge 87 s able to confirm this?)We need to describe a n-particle state with a state Ψ1...i... j...n which
assumes that distinction is possible, as expressed by the ordered indices in the notation,
and we introduce the indistinguishability afterwards.
Indistinguishability, or permutation symmetry, means that the exchange of any two
quantum particles results in the same physical observations.* Now, two quantum states
have the same physical properties if they differ at most by a phase factor; indistinguishability
thus requires
Ψ1...i... j...n = eiα Ψ1... j...i...n (55)
for some unknown angle α. Applying this expression twice, by exchanging the same couple
of indices again, allows us to conclude that e2iα = 1. This implies that
Ψ1...i... j...n = ±Ψ1... j...i...n, (56)
in other words, a wave function is either symmetric or antisymmetric under exchange of
indices. (One can also say that the eigenvalue for the exchange operator is either +1 or
−1.)
⊳ Quantumtheory thus predicts that quantum particles can be indistinguishable
in one of two distinct ways.**
⊳ Particles corresponding to symmetric wave functions – those which transform
under particle exchange with a ‘+’ in equation (56) – are called***
bosons.
⊳ Particles corresponding to antisymmetric wave functions – those which
transform under particle exchange with a ‘−’ in equation (56) – are
called**** fermions.
* We therefore have the same situation that we encountered already several times: an overspecification of
the mathematical description, here the explicit ordering of the indices, implies a symmetry of this description,
which in our case is a symmetry under exchange of indices, i.e., under exchange of particles.
**This conclusion applies to three-dimensional space only. In two dimensions there are more possibilities.
*** ‘Bosons’ are named after the Indian physicist Satyenra Nath Bose (b. 1894 Calcutta, d. 1974 Calcutta)
Ref. 70 who first described the statistical properties of photons. The work was later expanded by Albert Einstein,
so that one speaks of Bose–Einstein statistics.
**** The term ‘fermion’ is derived from the name of the Italian physicist and Nobel Prize winner Enrico
Fermi (b. 1901 Rome, d. 1954 Chicago) famous for his all-encompassing genius in theoretical and experimental
physics. He mainly worked on nuclear and elementary particle physics, on spin and on statistics.
For his experimental work he was called ‘quantum engineer’. He is also famous for his lectures, which are
still published in his own hand-writing, and his brilliant approach to physical problems. Nevertheless, his
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
5 permutation of particles 109
source
two identical
photons
detectors
possible
light
paths
mirrors
beam
splitter
FIGURE 55
Two-photon emission
and interference: both
photons are always
found arriving
together, at the same
detector.
Experiments show that the exchange behaviour depends on the type of particle. Photons
are found to be bosons. On the other hand, electrons, protons and neutrons are found
to be fermions. Also about half of the atoms are found to behave as bosons (at moderate
energies), the other half are fermions. In fact, a composite of an even number of fermions
(at moderate energies) – or of any number of bosons (at any energy) – turns out to be a
boson; a composite of an odd number of fermions is (always) a fermion.
For example, almost all of the known molecules are bosons (electronically speaking).
Fermionic molecules are rather special and even have a special name in chemistry; they
are called radicals and are known for their eagerness to react and to formnormal bosonic
molecules. Inside the human body, too many radicals can have adverse effects on health;
it is well known that vitamin C is important because it is effective in reducing the number
of radicals.
To which class of particles do tennis balls, people, trees, mountains and all other
Challenge 88 s macroscopic objects belong?
The behaviour of photons
A simple experiment, shown in Figure 55, allows observing the behaviour of photons
under exchange. Take a source that emits two photons of identical frequency and polarization
at the same time. In the laboratory, such a source can be realized with a downconverter,
a material that converts a photon of frequency 2ω into two photons of frequency
ω. Both photons, after having travelled exactly the same distance, are made to
enter the two sides of a beam splitter (for example, a half-silvered mirror). At the two
Ref. 71 exits of the beam splitter are two detectors. Experiments show that both photons are always
detected together on the same side, and never separately on opposite sides. This
result shows that photons are bosons. Fermions behave in exactly the opposite way; two
fermions are always detected separately on opposite sides, never together on the same
side.
highly deserved Nobel Prize was one of the few cases in which the prize was given for a discovery which
turned out to be incorrect. He left Italy because of the bad treatment his Jewish wife was suffering and
emigrated to the USA. Fermi worked on the Manhattan project that built the first atomic bombs. After
the second world war, he organized one of the best physics department in the world, at the University of
Chicago, where he was admired by everybody who worked with him.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
110 5 permutation of particles
4He shows bunching
3He shows anti-bunching
classical
prediction
classical
prediction
FIGURE 56 Bunching and antibunching of 3He and 4He helium atoms: the measurement result, the
detector and the experiment (from atomoptic.iota.u-psud.fr/research/helium/helium.html, photo
© Denis Boiron, Jerome Chatin).
Bunching and antibunching
Another way to test the exchange character of a particle is the Hanbury Brown–Twiss
experiment Page 50 described earlier on. First of all, this beautiful experiment shows that quantum
particles behave differently than classical particles. In addition, compared to classical
particles, fermions show antibunching – because of Pauli’s exclusion principle – and
bosons show bunching. Hanbury Brown and Twiss performed the experiment with photons,
which are bosons.
Ref. 72 In 2005, a French–Dutch research collaboration performed the experiment with
atoms. By using an extremely cold helium gas at 500 nK and a clever detector principle,
they were able to measure the correlation curves typical for the effect. The results,
shown in Figure 56, confirmthat 3He is a fermion and 4He is a boson, as predicted from
the composition rule of quantum particles.
The energy dependence of permutation symmetry
If experiments force us to conclude that nobody, not even nature, can distinguish between
two particles of the same type, we deduce that they do not form two separate
entities, but some sort of unity. Our naive, classical sense of particle as a separate entity
from the rest of the world is thus an incorrect description of the phenomenon of ‘particle’.
Indeed, no experiment can track particles with identical intrinsic properties in such
a way that they can be distinguished with certainty. This impossibility has been checked
experimentally with all elementary particles, with nuclei, with atoms and with numerous
molecules.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
5 permutation of particles 111
FIGURE 57 Picturing particles as localized excitations (left) or clouds (right).
How does this fit with everyday life, i.e., with classical physics? Photons do not worry
us much here. Let us focus the discussion on matter particles. We know to be able to
distinguish electrons by pointing to the wire in which they flow, and we can distinguish
our fridge from that of our neighbour. While the quantum of action makes distinction
impossible, everyday life allows it.
The simplest explanation for both observations is to imagine a microscopic particle,
especially an elementary one, as a bulge, i.e., as a localized excitation of the vacuum, or
as a tiny cloud. Figure 57 shows two such bulges and two clouds representing particles.
It is evident that if particles are too near to each other, it makes no sense to distinguish
them; we cannot say any more which is which.
The bulge image shows that either for large distances or for high potential walls separating
them, distinction of identical particles does become possible. In such situations,
measurements allowing to track them independently do exist. In other words, we can
specify a limit energy at which permutation symmetry of objects or particles separated
by a distance d becomes important. It is given by
E = c ħ
d
. (57)
Are you able to Challenge 89 e confirm the expression? For example, at everyday temperatures we can
distinguish atoms inside a solid from each other, since the energy so calculated is much
higher than the thermal energy of atoms. To have fun, you might want to determine at
Challenge 90 e what energy two truly identical human twins become indistinguishable. Estimating at
what energies the statistical character of trees or fridges will become apparent is then
straightforward.
To sum up, in daily life we are able to distinguish objects and thus people for two
reasons: because they are made of many parts, and because we live in a low energy environment.
The bulge image of particles purveys the idea that distinguishability exists for
objects in everyday life but not for particles in the microscopic domain.
The energy issue immediately adds a new aspect to the discussion. How can we describe
fermions and bosons in the presence of virtual particles and of antiparticles?
Indistinguishability in quantum field theory
Quantum field theory, as we will see shortly, simply puts the cloudy bulge idea of
Figure 57 into mathematical language. A situation with no bulge is called vacuum state.
Quantum field theory describes all particles of a given type as excitations of a single fun-
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1125 permutation of particles
damental field. Particles are indistinguishable because each particle is an excitation of the
same basic substrate and each excitation has the same properties. A situation with one
particle is then described by a vacuum state acted upon by a creation operator. Adding
a second particle is described by adding a second creation operator, and subtracting a
particle by adding a annihilation operator; the latter turns out to be the adjoint of the
former.
Quantum field theory studies how creation and annihilation operators must behave
to describe observations.* It arrives at the following conclusions:
— Fields with half-integer spin are fermions and imply (local) anticommutation.
— Fields with integer spin are bosons and imply (local) commutation.
— For all fields at space-like separations, the commutator, respectively anticommutator,
vanishes.
— Antiparticles of fermions are fermions, and antiparticles of bosons are bosons.
— Virtual particles behave under exchange like their real counterparts.
These connections are at the basis of quantum field theory.They describe how particles
are identical, more precisely, how they behave under permutation.
But why are quantum particles identical? Why are all electrons identical? Quantum
field theory describes electrons as identical excitations of the vacuum, and as such as
identical by construction. Of course, this answer is only partially satisfying.We will find
a better one only in the final part of our mountain ascent.
How accurately is permutationsy mmetry verified?
Are electrons perfect fermions? In 1990, a simple but effective experiment testing their
fermion behaviour was carried Ref. 73 out by Ramberg and Snow.They sent an electric current
of 30A through a copper wire for one month and looked for X-ray emission. They did
not find any.They concluded that electrons are always in an antisymmetric state, with a
symmetric component of less than
2 ⋅ 10−26 (60)
of the total state. In short, electrons are always in an antisymmetric state: they are
fermions.
The reasoning behind this elegant experiment is the following. If electrons would not
always be fermions, every now and then an electron could fall into the lowest energy
level of a copper atom, leading to X-ray emission. The lack of such X-rays implies that
electrons are fermions to a very high accuracy. X-rays could be emitted only if they were
bosons, at least part of the time. Indeed, two electrons, being fermions, cannot be in the
*Whenever the relation
[b, b†] = bb† − b†b = 1 (58)
holds between the creation operator b† and the annihilation operator b, the operators describe a boson.The
dagger can thus be seen as describing the operation of adjoining; a double dagger is equivalent to no dagger.
If the operators for particle creation and annihilation anticommute
{d, d†} = dd† + d†d = 1 (59)
they describe a fermion.The so defined bracket is called the anticommutator bracket.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
5 permutation of particles 113
same quantumstate: this restriction is called the Pauli exclusion principle. It applies to all
fermions and is the topic of the next chapter.
Copies, clones and gloves
Can classical systems be indistinguishable? They can: large molecules are examples –
provided they are made of exactly the same isotopes. Can large classical systems, made
of a mole or more particles be indistinguishable? This simple question effectively asks
whether a perfect copy, or (physical) clone, of a physical system is possible.
It could be argued that any factory for mass-produced goods, such as one producing
shirt buttons or paper clips, shows that copies are possible. But the appearance is deceiving.
On amicroscope there is usually some difference. Is this always the case? In 1982, the
Dutch physicist Dennis Dieks and independently, the US-American physicistsWootters
and Zurek, published simple proofs that quantum Ref. 74 systems cannot be copied.This is the
famous no-cloning theorem.
A copying machine is a machine that takes an original, reads out its properties and
produces a copy, leaving the original unchanged. This definition seems straightforward.
However, we know that if we extract information from an original, we have to interact
with it. As a result, the system will change at least by the quantum of action. We thus
expect that due to quantum theory, copies and originals can never be identical.*
Quantum theory indeed shows that copying machines are impossible. A copying machine
is described by an operator that maps the state of an original system to the state of
the copy. In other words, a copying machine is linear. This linearity leads to a problem.
Simply stated, if a copying machine were able to copy originals either in state |A⟩ or in
state |B⟩, it could not work if the state of the original were a superposition |A⟩ + |B⟩. Let
us see why.
A copy machine is a device described by an operatorU that changes the starting state
|s⟩c of the copy in the following way:
— If the original is in state |A⟩, a copier acts on the copy |s⟩c as
U|A⟩|s⟩c = |A⟩|A⟩c. (61)
— If the original is in state |B⟩, a copier acts on the copy |s⟩c as
U|B⟩|s⟩c = |B⟩|B⟩c. (62)
As a result of these two requirements, an original in the state |A + B⟩ is treated by the
copier as
U|A + B⟩|s⟩c = |A⟩|A⟩c + |B⟩|B⟩c. (63)
*This seems to provide a solution against banknote forgeries. In fact, SteveWiesner proposed to use quantum
theory already in 1970; he imagined to use polarizations of stored single photons as bits of serial numChallenge
91 ny bers. Can you explain why this cannot work?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
114 5 permutation of particles
This is in contrast to what we want, which would be
Uwanted|A + B⟩|s⟩c = (|A⟩ + |B⟩)(|A⟩c + |B⟩c). (64)
In other words, a copy machine cannot copy a state completely.*This is the so-called
no-cloning theorem.
The impossibility of copying is implicit in quantum theory. If we were able to clone
systems, we could measure a variable of a system and a second variable on its copy. We
would be thus able to beat the indeterminacy relation in both copies. This is impossible.
In short, copies are always imperfect.
The lack of quantum mechanical copying machines is disappointing. Such science
fiction machines could be fed with two different inputs, such as a lion and a goat, and
produce a superposition: a chimaera. Quantum theory shows that all these imaginary
beings or situations cannot be realized.
Other researchers then explored hownear to perfection a copy can be, especially in the
Ref. 75 case of classical systems. To make a long story short, these investigations show that also
the copying or cloning of macroscopic systems is impossible. In simple words, copying
machines do not exist. Copies can always be distinguished from originals if observations
aremade with sufficient care. In particular, this is the case for biological clones; biological
clones are identical twins born following separate pregnancies. They differ in their finger
prints, iris scans, physical and emotional memories, brain structures, and in many other
Challenge 92 s aspects. (Can you specify a few more?) In short, biological clones, like identical twins,
are not copies of each other.
In summary, everyday life objects such as photocopies, billiard balls or twins are always
distinguishable.There are two reasons: first, quantum effects play no role in everyday
life, so that there is no danger of unobservable exchange; secondly, perfect clones of
classical systems do not exist anyway, so that there always are tiny differences between
any two objects, even if they look identical at first sight. Gloves, being classical systems,
can thus always be distinguished.
Summary
As a consequence of the quantum of action ħ, quantum particles are indistinguishable.
This happens in one of two ways: they are either bosons or fermions. Despite the indistinguishability
of quantons, the state of physical systems cannot be copied to a second
system with the same particle content.Therefore, perfect clones do not exist in nature.
* The no-cloning theorem puts severe limitations on quantum computers, as computations often need
copies of intermediate results. The theorem also shows that faster-than-light communication is impossible
in EPR experiments. In compensation, quantum cryptography becomes possible – at least in the laboratory.
Indeed, the no-cloning theorem shows that nobody can copy a quantum message without being noticed.
The specific ways to use this result in cryptography are the 1984 Bennett–Brassard protocol and the 1991
Ekert protocol.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
Cha p t e r 6
ROTATIONS AND STATISTICS
– VISUALIZING SPIN
Spini s the observation that matter beams can be polarized: rays can be rotated.
pin thus describes how particles behave under rotations. Particles are thus not
imply point-like: quantum particles Page 96 can rotate around an axis. This proper rotation
is called spin; like macroscopic rotation, it is described by an angular momentum.
In the following, we recall that the spin of quantons is quantized in units of ħ/2.Then
we show a deep result: the value of spin determines whether a quantum particle, and any
general quantum system, is a boson or a fermion.
Quantum particles and symmetry
Ref. 76 The general background for the appearance of spin was clarified by Eugene Wigner in
1939.* He started by recapitulating that any quantum particle, if elementary, must behave
like an irreducible representation of the set of all viewpoint changes. This set of viewpoint
changes forms the symmetry group of flat space-time, the so-called inhomogeneous
Lorentz group. Why?
Vol. I, page 231 We have seen in the chapter on symmetry in the first volume of this adventure that
the symmetry of any composite systemleads to certain requirements for the components
of the system. If the components do not follow these requirements, they cannot build a
symmetric composite.
We know from everyday life and precision experiments that all physical systems are
symmetric under translation in time and space, under rotation in space, under boosts,
and – in many cases – under mirror reflection, matter–antimatter exchange and motion
reversal.We know these symmetries known from everyday life; for example, the usefulness
of what we call ‘experience’ in everyday life is simply a consequence of time translation
symmetry. The set of all these common symmetries, more precisely, of all these
symmetry transformations, is called the inhomogeneous Lorentz group.
These symmetries, i.e., these changes of viewpoints, lead to certain requirements for
the components of physical systems, i.e., for the elementary quantum particles. In mathVol.
I, page 231 ematical language, the requirement is expressed by saying that elementary particles must
be irreducible representations of the symmetry group.
Every textbook on quantum theory carries out this reasoning in systematic detail.
Starting with the Lorentz group, one obtains a list of all possible irreducible represen-
* Eugene Wigner (b. 1902B udapest, d. 1995 Princeton), Hungarian–US-American theoretical physicist, received
the Nobel Prize for physics in 1963. He wrote over 500 papers, many about various aspects of symmetry
in nature. He was also famous for being the most polite physicist in the world.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
116 6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
tations, in other words, a list of all possible ways that elementary particles can behave.
* Cataloguing the possibilities, one finds first of all that every elementary particle is described
by four-momentum – no news so far – by an internal angular momentum, the
spin, and by a set of parities.
— Four-momentum results from the translation symmetry of nature. The momentum
value describes how a particle behaves under translation, i.e., under position and time
shift of viewpoints.Themagnitude of four-momentumis an invariant property, given
by the mass, whereas its orientation in space-time is free.
— Spin results from the rotation symmetry of nature.The spin value describes how an
object behaves under rotations in three dimensions, i.e., under orientation change
of viewpoints.** The magnitude of spin is an invariant property, and its orientation
has various possibilities with respect to the direction of motion. In particular, the
spin of massive quantum particles behaves differently from that of massless quantum
particles.
For massive quantum particles, the inhomogeneous Lorentz group implies that
the invariant magnitude of spin is 󵀄J(J + 1) ħ, often written, by oversimplification,
as J. It is thus customary to say and write ‘spin J’ instead of the cumbersome ‘spin
󵀄J(J + 1) ħ’. Since the value of the quantumnumber J specifies the magnitude of the
angular momentum, it gives the representation under rotations of a given particle
type. The exploration shows that the spin quantum number J can be any multiple
of 1/2, i.e., it can take the values 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2, 2, 5/2, etc. As summarized in Table 4,
experiments show that electrons, protons and neutrons have spin 1/2, the W and Z
particles spin 1 and helium atoms spin 0. In addition, the representation of spin J
is 2J + 1 dimensional, meaning that the spatial orientation of the spin has 2J + 1
possible values. For electrons, with J = 1/2, there are thus two possibilities; they are
usually called ‘up’ and ‘down’. Spin thus only takes discrete values.This is in contrast
with linear momentum, whose representations are infinite dimensional and whose
possible values form a continuous range.
Also massless quantum particles are characterized by the value of their spin. It can
take the same values as in the massive case. For example, photons and gluons have
spin 1. For massless particles, the representations are one-dimensional, so that massless
particles are completely described by their helicity, defined as the projection of
the spin onto the direction of motion. Massless particles can have positive or negative
helicity, often also called right-handed and left-handed polarization.There is no
other freedom for the orientation of spin in the massless case.
— To complete the list of particle properties, the remaining, discrete symmetries of the
inhomogeneous Lorentz group must be included. Since motion inversion, spatial parity
and charge inversion are parities, each elementary particle has to be described by
three additional numbers, called T, P and C, each of which can only take the values
+1 or −1. Being parities, these numbers must be multiplied to yield the value for a
composed system.
* To be of physical relevance for quantum theory, representations have to be unitary. The full list of irreducible
and unitary representations of viewpoint changes thus provides the range of possibilities for any
particle that wants to be elementary.
** The group of physical rotations is also called SO(3), since mathematically it is described by the group of
Special Orthogonal 3 by 3 matrices.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin 117
TABLE 4 Particle spin as representation of the rotation group.
S p i n Sys t e m Mas s i v e e x a m pl e s Mas s l e s s e x a m pl e s
[ħ] unchanged after
rotation by
elementary composite elementary
0 anyangle Higgs
boson
mesons, nuclei,
atoms
none a
1/2 2 turns e, μ, τ, q,
󰜈e, 󰜈μ, 󰜈τ
nuclei, atoms,
molecules,
radicals
none, as neutrinos have a tiny mass
1 1 turn W, Z mesons, nuclei,
atoms, molecules,
toasters
д, γ
3/2 2/3 turn none a baryons, nuclei,
atoms
none a
2 1/2 turn none nuclei ‘graviton’ b
5/2 2/5 turn none nuclei none
3 1/3 turn none nuclei c none
etc.c etc.c etc.c etc.c etc.d
a. Supersymmetry, a symmetry conjectured in the twentieth century, predicts elementary particles
in these and other boxes.
b.The graviton has not yet been observed.
c. Nuclei exist with spins values up to at least 101/2 and 51 (in units of ħ). Ref. 77
In short, the symmetries nature lead to the classification of all elementary quantum particles
by their mass, their momentum, their spin and their P, C and T parities.
Types of quantum particles
The spin values observed for all quantum particles in nature are given in Table 4. The
parities and all known intrinsic properties of the elementary particles are given in Table 5.
Spin and parities together are called quantum numbers. All other intrinsic properties of
quantons are related to interactions, such as mass, electric charge or isospin. We will
Vol. V, page 145 explore them in the next volume.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
118 6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
TABLE 5 Elementary particle properties.
Particle Mass ma Lifetime τ
or energy
width, b
main decay
modes
Isospin I,
spin J, c
parity P,
charge
parity C
Charge,
isospin,
strangeness,
c
charm,
beauty, d
topness:
QISCBT
Lepton
&
baryon e
numbers
L B
Elementary radiation (bosons)
photon γ 0 (<10−53 kg) stable I(JPC) =
0, 1(1−−)
000000 0, 0
W± 80.398(25) GeV/c2 2.124(41) GeV J = 1 ±100000 0, 0
67.60(27)% hadrons,
32.12(36)% l+󰜈
Z 91.1876(21) GeV/c2 2.65(2) ⋅ 10−25 s J = 1 000000 0, 0
or 2.4952(23) GeV/c2
69.91(6)% hadrons,
10.0974(69)% l+l−
gluon 0 stable I(JP) = 0(1−) 000000 0, 0
Elementary matter (fermions): leptons
electron e 9.109 382 15(45) ⋅ > 13 ⋅ 1030 s J = 12
−100 000 1, 0
10−31 kg = 81.871 0438(41) pJ/c2
= 0.510 998 910(13) MeV/c2 = 0.000 548 579 909 43(23) u
gyromagnetic ratio μe/μB = −1.001 159 652 1811(7)
muon μ 0.188 353 130(11) yg 2.197 03(4) μs J = 12
−100000 1, 0
99% e− ̄󰜈e󰜈μ
= 105.658 3668(38) MeV/c2 = 0.113 428 9256(29) u
gyromagnetic ratio μμ/(eħ/2mμ) = −1.001 165 9208(6)
tau τ 1.776 84(17) GeV/c2 290.6(1.0) fs J = 12
−100000 1, 0
el. neutrino
󰜈e
< 2 eV/c2 J = 12
1, 0
muon
neutrino 󰜈μ
< 2 eV/c2 J = 12
1, 0
tau neutrino
󰜈τ
< 2 eV/c2 J = 12
1, 0
Elementary matter (fermions): quarks f
up u 1.5 to 3.3MeV/c2 see proton I(JP) = 12
( 1
2
+
) +2
3+1
20000 0, 13
down d 3.5 to 6MeV/c2 see proton I(JP) = 12
( 1
2
+
) −1
3−1
20000 0, 13
strange s 70 to 130MeV/c2 I(JP) = 0(12
+
) −1
30−1000 0, 13
charm c 1.27(11) GeV/c2 I(JP) = 0(12
+
) +2
300+100 0, 13
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin 119
TABLE 5 (Continued) Elementary particle properties.
Particle Mass ma Lifetime τ
or energy
width, b
main decay
modes
Isospin I,
spin J, c
parity P,
charge
parity C
Charge,
isospin,
strangeness,
c
charm,
beauty, d
topness:
QISCBT
Lepton
&
baryon e
numbers
L B
bottom b 4.20(17) GeV/c2 τ = 1.33(11) ps I(JP) = 0(12
+
) −1
3000−10 0, 13
top t 171.2(2.1) GeV/c2 I(JP) = 0(12
+
) +2
30000+1 0,13
Observed elementary boson
Higgs boson 126GeV/c2 J = 0
Notes:
a. See also the table of SI prefixes on page 192. About the eV/c2 mass unit, see page 196.
b.The energy width Γ of a particle is related to its lifetime τ by the indeterminacy relation Γτ = ħ.
There is a difference between the half-life t1/2 and the lifetime τ of a particle: they are related by
t1/2 = τ ln 2, where ln 2 ≈ 0.693 147 18; the half-life is thus shorter than the lifetime. The unified
atomic mass unit u is defined as 1/12 of the mass of a carbon 12 atom at rest and in its ground
state. One has 1u = 1
12m(12C) = 1.660 5402(10) yg.
c. To keep the table short, its header does not explicitly mention colour, the charge of the strong
interactions.This has to be added to the list of basic object properties.Quantumnumbers containing
the word ‘parity’ are multiplicative; all others are additive. Time parity T (not to be confused
with topness T), better called motion inversion parity, is equal to CP in all known particles.The
isospin I (or IZ) is defined only for up and down quarks and their composites, such as the proton
and the neutron. In the literature one also sees references to the so-called G-parity, defined as
G = (−1)IC .
. The table header also does not mention the weak charge of the particles. The details on weak
charge д, or,more precisely, on the weak isospin, a quantum number assigned to all left-handed
fermions (and right-handed anti-fermions), but to no right-handed fermion (and no left-handed
antifermion), are given in the Vol. V, page 222 section on the weak interactions.
d. ‘Beauty’ is now commonly called bottomness; similarly, ‘truth’ is nowcommonly called topness.
The signs of the quantum numbers S, I, C, B, T can be defined in different ways. In the standard
assignment shown here, the sign of each of the non-vanishing quantum numbers is given by the
sign of the charge of the corresponding quark.
e. If supersymmetry existed, R-parity would have to be added to this column. R-parity is a multiplicative
quantum number related to the lepton number L, the baryon number B and the spin
J through the definition R = (−1)3B+L+2J . All particles from the standard model are R-even,
whereas their conjectured supersymmetric partner particles would be R-odd.
f . For the precise definition and meaning of quark masses, see page 211 in volume V.
Spin1/2 and tethered objects
A central result of quantum theory is that spin 1/2 is a possibility in nature, even though
this value does not appear in everyday life. For a system to have spin 1/2 means that for
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
120 6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
FIGURE 58 An argument
showing why rotations by
4π are equivalent to no
rotation at all.
such a system only a rotation by two turns is equivalent to none at all, while one by one
turn is not. No simple systems with this property exist in everyday life, but such systems
do exist inmicroscopic systems: electrons, neutrinos, silver atoms and molecular radicals
all have spin 1/2. Table 4 gives a more extensive list.
Vol. I, page 48 The mathematician Hermann Weyl used a simple image explaining the connection
between spin 1/2 and invariance under rotation by 4π. Take two cones, touching each
other at their tips as well as along a line, as shown in Figure 58. Hold one cone and roll
the other around it. When the rolling cone, after a full turn around the other cone, has
come back to the original position, it has rotated by some angle. If the cones are wide,
the rotation angle is small. If the cones are very thin, like needles, the moving cone has
rotated by (almost) 720 degrees. A rotation of 720 degrees is thus similar to one by 0
degrees. If we imagine the cone angle to vary continuously, this visualization also shows
that a 720 degree rotation can be continuously deformed into a 0 degree rotation,whereas
a 360 degree rotation cannot.
There are systems in everyday life that behave like spin 1/2, but they are not simple:
all such systems are tethered. The most well-known system is the belt. Figure 59 and
Figure 60 show that a rotation by 4π of a belt buckle is equivalent to no rotation at all:
this is easily achieved by moving the belt around. You may want to repeat the process
Challenge 93 e by yourself, using a real belt or a strip of paper, in order to get a feeling for it. The untangling
process is often called the belt trick, but also scissor trick, plate trick, string trick,
Philippine wine dance or Balinese candle dance. It is sometimes incorrectly attributed to
Dirac, because he used it extensively in his lectures.
The human body has such a belt built in: the arm. Just take your hand, put an object
on it for clarity, such as a cup, and turn the hand and object by 2π by twisting the arm.
After a second rotation the whole system will be untangled again, as shown in Figure 61.
The trick is evenmore impressive when many arms are used. You can put your two hands
Challenge 94 e (if you chose the correct starting position) under the cup or you can take a friend or two
who each keep a hand attached to the cup together with you. The belt trick can still be
Challenge 95 e performed, and the whole system untangles after two full turns.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin 121
FIGURE 59 Assume that the belt cannot be observed, but the square object can, and that it represents
a particle. The animation then shows that such a particle (the square object) can return to the starting
position after rotation by 4π (and not after 2π). Such a ‘belted’ particle thus fulfills the defining property
of a spin 1/2 particle: rotating it by 4π is equivalent to no rotation at all. The belt thus represents the
spinor wave function; for example, a 2π rotation leads to a twist; this means a change of the sign of the
wave function. A 4π rotation has no influence on the wave function. You can repeat the trick at home,
with a paper strip. The equivalence is shown here with two attached belts, but the trick works with any
positive number of belts! (QuickTime film © Antonio Martos)
FIGURE 60 The belt trick with a simple belt: a double rotation of the belt buckle is equivalent to no
rotation. (QuickTime film © Greg Egan)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
122 6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
α = 0 α = 2π α = 4π
FIGURE 61 The human arm as spin 1/2 model.
rotating the buckle
either by 4π
or simply rearranging
the bands gives the
other situation
FIGURE 62 The generalized
belt trick, modelling the
rotation behaviour of a spin
1/2 particle: independently of
the number of bands or tubes
or strings attached, the two
situations can be transformed
into each other, either by
rotating the central object by
4π or by keeping the central
object fixed and moving the
bands around it.
This leads us to the most general way to show the connection between tethering and
spin 1/2. Just glue any number of threads, belts or tubes, say half a metre long, to some
object, as shown in Figure 62. (With many such tails, is not appropriate any more to call
it a belt buckle.) Like the armof a human being, each band is supposed to go to spatial
infinity and be attached there. If the object, which represents the particle, is rotated by 2π,
twists appear in its tails. If the object is rotated by an additional turn, to a total of 4π, all
twists and tangles can be made to disappear, without moving or turning the object. You
really have to experience this in order to believe it. And the process really works with
any number of bands glued to the object. The website www.evl.uic.edu/hypercomplex/
html/dirac.html provides a animation showing this process with four attached belts.
In sort, all these animations show that belt buckles, and in fact all (sufficiently) tethered
systems, return to their original state only after rotations by 4π, and not after rotations
by 2π only. Tethered objects behave like spin 1/2 particles. In fact, tethered objects,
such as belt buckles, are the only systems that reproduce Challenge 96 e spin 1/2 properties. In the last
part of our adventure we will discover the deep underlying reason for the equivalence
between spin 1/2 particles and tethered systems.
Exploring the symmetries of wave functions, quantum theory shows that rotations
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin 123
FIGURE 63 Two belt buckles
connected by a belt, one way of
visualizing two spin 1/2 particles.
require the existence of spin for all quantum particles. An investigation of the wave function
shows that wave functions of elementarymatter particles behave under rotation like
tethered objects. For example, a wave function whose tethered equivalent is tangled acquires
a negative sign.
In summary, quantum theory implies the existence of the slightly counter-intuitive
spin 1/2 value. In particular, it appears for elementary matter particles.
The extension of the belt trick
But why do experiments show that all fermions have half-integer spin and that all bosons
have integer spin? In particular, Page 125 why do electrons obey the Pauli exclusion principle? At
first sight, it is not clear what the spin value has to do with the statistical properties of a
particle. In fact, there are several ways to show that rotations and statistics are connected.
Ref. 80 The first proof, due toWolfgang Pauli, used the details of quantumfield theory and was so
complicated that its essential ingredientswere hidden. It took several decades to convince
Ref. 81 everybody that a further observation about belts was the central part of the proof.
Page 111 Starting from the bulge model of quantum particles shown in Figure 57, we can imagine
a tube connecting two particles, similar to a belt connecting two belt buckles, as
shown in Figure 63. The buckles represent the particles. The tube keeps track of their
relative orientation. If one particle/buckle is rotated by 2π along any axis, a twist is inserted
into the belt. As just shown, if the same buckle is rotated by another 2π, bringing
the total to 4π, the ensuing double twist can easily be undone withoutmoving or rotating
the buckles.
Now we look again at Figure 63. If we take the two buckles and simply swap their
positions, a twist is introduced into the belt. If we swap them again, the twist will disappear.
In short, two connected belt buckles return to their original state only after a double
exchange, and not after a single exchange.
In other words, if we take each buckle to represent a particle and a twist to mean
a factor −1, the belt exactly describes the phase behaviour of spin 1/2 wave functions,
both under rotation and under exchange. In particular,we see that rotation and exchange
behaviour are related.
Similarly, also the belt trick itself can be extended to exchange. Take two buckles that
are connected with many bands or threads, like in Figure 64 or in Figure 65.The band can
connect the particles, or go to spatial infinity, or both. An exchange of the two buckles
produces quite amessy tangle. But almost incredibly, in all cases, a second exchange leads
Challenge 97 e back to the original situation, if the belts are properly rearranged. You might want to test
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
124 6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
FIGURE 64 Extended
belt models for two
spin 1/2 particles.
FIGURE 65 Assume that the belts cannot be observed, but the square objects can, and that they
represent particles. We know from above that belted buckles behave as spin 1/2 particles. The
animation shows that two such particles return to the original situation if they are switched in position
twice (but not once). Such particles thus fulfill the defining property of fermions. (For the opposite case,
that of bosons, a simple exchange would lead to the identical situation.) You can repeat the trick at
home using paper strips. The equivalence is shown here with two belts per particle, but the trick works
with any positive number of belts attached to each buckle. This animation is the essential part of the
proof that spin 1/2 particles are fermions. This is called the spin–statistics theorem. (QuickTime film
© Antonio Martos)
yourself that the behaviour is also valid if additional particles are involved, as long as you
always exchange the same two particles twice.
We conclude that tethered objects behave like fermions under exchange. These observations
together form the spin–statistics theorem for spin 1/2 particles: spin and ex-
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin 125
change behaviour are related. Indeed, these almost ‘experimental’ arguments can be put
Ref. 82 into exact mathematical language by studying the behaviour of the configuration space
of particles. These investigations result in the following statements:
⊳ Objects of spin 1/2 are fermions.*
⊳ Exchange and rotation of spin 1/2 particles are similar processes.
In short, objects that behave like spin 1/2 particles under rotations also behave like
fermions under exchange. And vice versa. The exchange behaviour of particles determines
their statistical properties; the rotation behaviour determines their spin. By extending
the belt trick to several buckles, each with several belts, we thus visualized the
spin–statistics theorem for fermions.
Note that all these arguments require three dimensions of space, because there are no
tangles (or knots) in fewer or more dimensions.** And indeed, spin exists only in three
spatial dimensions.
The belt trick leads to interesting puzzles. We saw that a spin 1/2 object can be modelled
by imagining that a belt leading to spatial infinity is attached to it. If we want to
model the spin behaviour with attached one-dimensional strings instead of bands, what
Challenge 99 s is the minimum number of strings we need? More difficult is the following puzzle: Can
the belt trick be performed if the buckle is glued into a mattress, thus with the mattress
Challenge 100 d acting like ‘infinitely many’ belts?
Angels, Pauli’s exclusion principle and the hardness of matter
Why are we able to knock on a door? Why can stones not fly through tree trunks?How
does the mountain we are walking on carry us?Why can’t we walk across walls? In classical
physics, we avoided this issue, by taking solidity as a defining property of matter.
But we cannot do so anymore: we have seen that matter consists mainly of low density
electron clouds.The quantum of action thus forces us to explain the quantum of matter.
The explanation of the impenetrability of matter is so important that it led to a Nobel
prize in physics: interpenetration of bodies is made impossible by Pauli’s exclusion
principle among the electrons inside atoms. Pauli’s exclusion principle states:
⊳ Two fermions cannot occupy the same quantum state.
All experiments known confirm the statement.
Why do electrons and other fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle?The answer
Ref. 83 can be given with a beautifully simple argument.We know that exchanging two fermions
produces a minus sign in the total wave function. Imagine these two fermions being, as
* A mathematical observable behaving like a spin 1/2 particle is neither a vector nor a tensor, as you may
Challenge 98 e want to check. An additional concept is necessary; such an observable is called a spinor.We will introduce
Page 176 it in detail later on.
** Of course, knots and tangles do exist in higher dimensions. Instead of considering knotted onedimensional
lines, one can consider knotted planes or knotted higher-dimensional hyperplanes. For example,
deformable planes can be knotted in four dimensions and deformable 3-spaces in five dimensions.
However, the effective dimensions that produce the knot are always three.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
126 6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
a classical physicist would say, located at the same spot, or as a quantum physicist would
say, in the same state. If that could be possible, an exchange would change nothing in the
system. But an exchange of fermions must produce a minus sign for the total state. Both
possibilities – no change at all as well as a minus sign – cannot be realized at the same
time. There is only one way out: two fermions must avoid to ever be in the same state.
This is Pauli’s exclusion principle.
The exclusion principle is the reason that two pieces of matter in everyday life cannot
penetrate each other, but have to repel each other. For example, take a bell. A bell would
not work if the colliding pieces that produce the sound would interpenetrate. But in any
example of two interpenetrating pieces, the electrons from different atoms would have
to be at the same spot: theywould have to be in the same states.This is forbidden. Pauli’s
exclusion principle forbids interpenetration of matter. Bells only work because of the
exclusion principle.
Why don’t we fall through the floor, even though gravity pulls us down, but remain
standing on its surface? Again, the reason is Pauli’s exclusion principle. Why does the
floor itself not fall? It does not fall, because the matter of the Earth cannot interpenetrate
and cannot be compressed further. Pauli’s exclusion principle does not allow atoms to
be compressed. In other words, the exclusion principle implies that matter cannot be
compressed indefinitely, as at a certain stage an effective Pauli pressure appears, so that
a compression limit ensues. For this reason for example, planets or neutron stars do not
collapse under their own gravity.
The exclusion principle is the reason that atoms are extended electron clouds. In fact,
the exclusion principle forces the electrons in atoms to form shells. When electrons are
added to a nucleus and when one shell is filled, a next one is started. This is the origin of
the periodic systems of the elements.
The size of any atom is the size of its last shell.Without the exclusion principle, atoms
would be as small as a hydrogen atom. The same applies to nuclei: their size is given
by the last nucleon shell. Without the exclusion principle, nuclei would be as small as a
single proton. In fact, they are about 100 000 times larger.
The exclusion principle also answers an old question: How many angels can dance
on the top of a pin? (Note that angels, if at all, must be made of fermions, as you might
want to deduce from the information Challenge 101 s known about them.) Both theory and experiment
confirm the answer already given by Thomas Aquinas in the Middle Ages: Only one
Ref. 84 angel!The fermion exclusion principle could also be called ‘angel exclusion principle’. To
stay in the topic, the principle also shows that ghosts cannot be objects, as ghosts are
supposed to be able to traverse walls.
Exaggerating a bit, the exclusion principle keeps things in shape; without it, there
would be no three-dimensional objects. Only the exclusion principle keeps the cloudy
atoms of nature frommerging, holding them apart. This repulsion keeps the size of soap,
planets and neutron stars to a finite value. All shapes of solids and fluids are a direct
consequence of the exclusion principle. In other words, when we knock on a table or on
a door, we prove experimentally that both objects are made of fermions.
So far, we have only considered spin 1/2 particles. We will not talk much about systems
with odd spin of higher value, such as 3/2 or 5/2. Such systems can all be seen as
Challenge 102 e being composed of spin 1/2 entities. Can you confirm this?
We did not talk about lower spins than 1/2 either. A famous theorem states that a spin
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin 127
value between 0 and 1/2 is impossible, because the largest angle that can be measured
in three dimensions is 4π. There is no way to measure a larger angle;* the quantum of
action makes this impossible. Thus there cannot be any spin value between 0 and 1/2 in
nature.
Is spina rotation about ana xis?
The spin of a particle behaves experimentally like an intrinsic angular momentum, adds
up like angularmomentum, is conserved as part of angularmomentum, is described like
angular momentum and has a name synonymous with angular momentum. Despite all
this, for many decades a strange and false myth was spread in many physics courses and
textbooks around the world: “Spin 1/2, despite its name, is not a rotation about an axis.”
It is time to finish with this example of incorrect thinking.
Electrons do have spin 1/2 and are charged. Electrons and all other charged particles
with spin 1/2 do have a magnetic moment.** A magnetic moment is expected for any
rotating charge. In other words, spin 1/2 does behave like rotation. However, assuming
that a particle consists of a continuous charge distribution in rotational motion gives the
wrong value for the magnetic moment. In the early days of the twentieth century, when
physicists were still thinking in classical terms, they concluded that charged spin 1/2
particles thus cannot be rotating.This myth has survived through many textbooks.The
correct deduction, however, is that the assumption of continuous charge distribution is
wrong. Indeed, charge is quantized; nobody expects that elementary charge is continuously
spread over space, as that would contradict its quantization.
The other reason for the false myth is rotation itself. The myth is based on classical
thinking and maintains that any rotating objectmust have integer spin. Since half integer
spin is not possible in classical physics, it is argued that such spin is not due to rotation.
But let us recall what rotation is. Both the belt trick for spin 1/2 as well as the integer
spin case remind us: a rotation of one body around another is a fraction or a multiple
of an exchange. What we call a rotating body in everyday life is a body continuously
exchanging the positions of its parts. Rotation and exchange are the same.
Now, we just found that spin is exchange behaviour. Since rotation is exchange and
spin is exchange, it follows that
⊳ Spin is rotation.
Since we deduced spin, like Wigner, from rotation invariance, this conclusion is not a
surprise. In addition, the belt model of a spin 1/2 particle tells us that such a particle
can rotate continuously Page 121 without any hindrance. Also the magnetic moment then gets its
correct value. In short, we are allowed to maintain that spin is rotation about an axis,
without any contradiction to observations, even for spin 1/2.
In summary, the belt model shows that also spin 1/2 is rotation, as long as we assume
Ref. 85 that only the buckle can be observed, not the belt(s), and that elementary charge is not
* This statement, like all statements about spin 1/2, is tied to the three-dimensionality of space. In two
dimensions, other largest angles and other ‘spin’ values are possible.
** This magnetic moment can easily be measured in an experiment; however, not one of the Stern–Gerlach
Challenge 103 ny type.Why not?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
128 6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
x
t
FIGURE 66 Equivalence of exchange and rotation
in space-time.
continuously distributed in space.*
Since permutation properties and spin properties of fermions are so well described
by the belt model, we could be led to the conclusion that these properties might really
be consequence of such belt-like connections between particles and the outside world.
Maybe for some reason we only observe the belt buckles, not the belts themselves. In the
final part of this walk we will discover whether this idea is correct.
Rotationr equires antiparticles
The connection between rotation and antiparticles may be the most astonishing conclusion
from the experiments showing the existence of spin. So far, we have seen that rotation
requires the existence of spin, that spin appears when relativity is introduced into
quantum theory, and that relativity Vol. II, page 67 requires antimatter. Taking these three statements together,
the conclusion of the title is not surprising any more: rotation requires antiparticles.
Interestingly, there is a simple argumentmaking the same point with the beltmodel,
if it is extended from space alone to full space-time.
To learn how to think in space-time, let us take a particle spin 1, i.e., a particle looking
like a detached belt buckle in three dimensions.When moving in a 2+1 dimensional
Challenge 104 ny space-time, it is described by a ribbon. Playing around with ribbons in space-time, instead
of belts in space, provides many interesting conclusions. For example, Figure 66
shows that wrapping a rubber ribbon around the fingers can show, again, that a rotation
of a body by 2π in presence of a second one is the same as exchanging the positions of
the two bodies.** Both sides of the hand transform the same initial condition, at one
edge of the hand, to the same final condition at the other edge.We have thus successfully
* Obviously, the exact structure of the electron still remains unclear at this point. Any angular momentum
S is given classically by S = Θω; however, neither themoment of inertia Θ, connected to the rotation radius
and electron mass, nor the angular velocity ω are known at this point. We have to wait quite a while, until
the final part of our adventure, to find out more.
**Obviously, the full argument would need to check the full spin 1/2model of Figure 62 in four-dimensional
Challenge 105 ny space-time. But doing this is not an easy task; there is no good visualization yet.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin 129
x
t
x
t
x
t
x
t
x
t
FIGURE 67 Belts in space-time: rotation and antiparticles.
extended a known result fromspace to space-time: rotation and exchange are equivalent.
If you think that Figure 66 is not a satisfying explanation, you are right. A more satisfying
explanation must include a smooth sequence of steps realizing the equivalence
between rotation and exchange.This is shown in Figure 67. We assume that each particle
is described by a segment; in the figure, the two segments lie horizontally.The leftmost
diagram shows two particles: one at rest and one being rotated by 2π.The deformation
of the ribbons shows that this process is equivalent to the exchange in position of two
particles, which is shown in the rightmost diagram.
But the essential point is made by the intermediate diagrams. We note that the sequence
showing the equivalence between rotation and exchange requires the use of a
loop. But such a loop in space-time describes the appearance of a particle–antiparticle
pair! In other words, without antiparticles, the equivalence of rotation and exchange
would not hold. In short, rotation in space-time requires the existence of antiparticles.
Why is fencing with laser beams impossible?
When a sword is approaching dangerously, we can stop it with a second sword.Many old
films use such scenes. When a laser beam is approaching, it is impossible to fend it off
with a second beam, despite all science fiction films showing so. Banging two laser beams
against each other is impossible. The above explanation of the spin–statistics theorem
shows why.
The electrons in the swords are fermions and obey the Pauli exclusion principle.
Fermions make matter impenetrable. On the other hand, the photons in laser beams
are bosons. Two bosons can be in the same state; bosons allow interpenetration.Matter
is impenetrable because at the fundamental level it is composed of fermions. Radiation is
composed of bosons; light beams can cross each other.The distinction between fermions
and bosons thus explains why objects can be touched while images cannot. In the first
part of our mountain ascent we started Vol. I, page 90 by noting this difference; now we know its origin.
Spin, statistics and composition
Under rotations, integer spin particles behave differently from half-integer particles. Integer
spin particles do not show the strange sign changes under rotations by 2π. In the
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
130 6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin
J = 0 J = 1/2 J = 1
FIGURE 68 Some visualizations of
spin representations.
belt imagery, integer spin particles need no attached strings. In particular, a spin 0 particle
obviously corresponds to a sphere.Models for other important spin values are shown
in Figure 68. Exploring their properties in the same way as above, we arrive at the full
spin–statistics theorem:
⊳ Exchange and rotation of objects are similar processes.
⊳ Objects of half-integer spin are fermions.They obey the Pauli exclusion principle.
⊳ Objects of integer spin are bosons.
You might prove by yourself that this Challenge 106 e suffices to show the following rule:
⊳ Composites of bosons, as well as composites of an even number of fermions
(at low energy), are bosons; composites of an uneven number of fermions are
fermions.*
These connections express basic characteristics of the three-dimensional world in which
we live.
A summary on spin and indistinguishability
The quantum of action implies that physical systems are made of two types of indistinguishable
quantum particles: bosons and fermions.The two possible exchange behaviours
are related to the particle spin value, because exchange is related to rotation.The connection
between spin and rotation implies that antiparticles exist. It also implies that spin is
intrinsically a three-dimensional phenomenon.
Challenge 107 ny *This rule implies that spin 1 and higher can also be achieved with tails; can you find such a representation?
Note that composite fermions can be bosons only up to that energy at which the composition breaks
down. Otherwise, by packing fermions into bosons, we could have fermions in the same state.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
6 rotations and statistics – visualizing spin 131
Experiments show that radiation is made of elementary particles that behave as
bosons. Bosons have integer spin. Two or more bosons, such as two photons, can share
the same state.This sharing makes laser light possible.
Experiments show thatmatter ismade of elementary particles that behave as fermions.
Fermions have half-integer spin.They obey Pauli’s exclusion principle: two fermions cannot
be in the same state.The exclusion principle between electrons explains the structure
and (partly) the size of atoms, as well as the chemical behaviour of atoms, as we will find
out later on. Together with the electrostatic repulsion of electrons, the exclusion principle
explains the incompressibility of matter and its lack of impenetrability.
Fermions make matter ‘hard’, bosons allow light beams to cross.
Limits and open questions of quantum statistics
The topic of quantum particle statistics remains a research field in theoretical and experimental
physics. In particular, researchers have searched and still are searching for
generalizations of the possible exchange behaviours of particles.
In two spatial dimensions, the result of an exchange of the wave function is not described
by a sign, but by a continuous phase. Two-dimensional quantum objects are
called anyons because they can have ‘any’ spin. Anyons appear as quasi-particles in
various experiments in solid state physics, because the set-up is often effectively twodimensional.
The fractional quantum Hall effect, perhaps the most interesting discovery
of modern experimental physics, has pushed anyons onto Vol. V, page 91 the stage of modern research.
Other theorists generalized the concept of fermions in other ways, introducing
Ref. 86 parafermions, parabosons, plektons and other hypothetical concepts. Oscar Greenberg
has spent most of his professional life on this issue. His conclusion is that in 3 + 1 spacetime
dimensions, only fermions and bosons exist. (Can you show that this implies that
Challenge 108 s the ghosts appearing in Scottish tales do not exist?)
Froma different viewpoint, the belt model of spin 1/2 invites to study the behaviour of
braids, open links and knots. (In mathematics, braids and open links aremade of strands
extending to infinity.) This fascinating part of mathematical physics has become important
with in modern unified theories, which all state that particles, especially at high
energies, are not point-like, but extended entities.The quest is to understand what happens
to permutation symmetry in a unified theory of nature. A glimpse of the difficulties
appears already above: how can Figures 57, 62 and 67 be reconciled and combined? We
Vol. VI, page 160 will settle this issue in the final part of our mountain ascent.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
Cha p t e r 7
SUPERPOSITIONS AND
PROBABILITIES – QUANTUM THEORY
WITHOUT IDEOLOGY
“The fact that an adequate philosophical
presentation has been so long delayed is no
doubt caused by the fact that Niels Bohr
brainwashed a whole generation of theorists
into thinking Ref. 87 that the job was done fifty years
ago. Murray Gell-Mann”
Why is this famous physical issue arousing such strong emotions? In particular,
ho is brainwashed, Gell-Mann, the discoverer of the quarks, or most of the
orld’s physicists working on quantum theory who follow Niels Bohr’s opinion?
In the twentieth century, quantum mechanics has thrown many in disarray. Quantum
mechanics is unfamiliar for two reasons: it allows superpositions and it leads to probabilities.
Let us explore and clarify these two issues.
Superpositions and probabilities appear because the quantum of action radically
changed the two most basic concepts of classical physics: state and system. The state is
not described any more by the specific values taken by position and momentum, but by
the specific wave function ‘taken’ by the position andmomentumoperators.* In addition,
in classical physics a system was described as a set of permanent aspects of nature; permanence
was defined as negligible interaction with the environment. Quantum mechanics
shows that this definition has to be modified as well.
A clarification of the appearance of superpositions, of the origin of probabilities and
of the concepts of state and system, is essential.We want to avoid getting lost on our way
to the top ofMotionMountain, as happened to quite a number of people since quantum
theory appeared, including Gell-Mann.
Why are people either dead or alive?
Theevolution equation of quantum mechanics is linear in thewave function; the linearity
reflects the existence of superpositions. Therefore we can imagine and try to construct
systems where the state ψ is a superposition of two radically distinct situations, such as
those of a dead and of a living cat.This famous fictional animal is called Schrödinger’s
cat after the originator of the example. Is it possible to produce it? And how would it
* It is equivalent, but maybe conceptually clearer, to say that the state is described by a complete set of
commuting operators. In fact, the discussion is somewhat simplified in the Heisenberg picture. However,
here we study the issue in the Schrödinger picture, using wave functions.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 133
Every such `artistic impression’ is wrong.
(Why?)
FIGURE 69 An artist’s
impression of a macroscopic
Challenge 109 s superposition is impossible.
evolve in time?We can ask the same two questions in other situations. For example, can
we produce a superposition of a state where a car is inside a closed garage with a state
where the car is outside?What happens then?
Such strange situations are not usually observed in everyday life.The reason for this
rareness is an important aspect of what is often called the ‘interpretation’ of quantum
mechanics. In fact, such strange situations are possible, and the superposition of macroscopically
distinct states has actually been observed in a few cases, though not for cats,
people or cars. To get an idea of the constraints, let us specify the situation in more detail.*
Macroscopic superpositions, coherence and incoherence
The object of discussion are linear superpositions of the type ψ = aψa+bψb, where ψa and
ψb are macroscopically distinct states of the system under discussion, and where a and b
are some complex coefficients. States are called macroscopically distinct when each state
corresponds to a different macroscopic situation, i.e., when the two states can be distinguished
using the concepts or measurement methods of classical physics. In particular,
this means that the physical action necessary to transform one state into the other must
be much larger than ħ. For example, two different positions of a body composed of a
large number of molecules are macroscopically distinct.
A ‘strange’ situation is thus a superposition of macroscopically distinct states. Let us
work out the essence of suchmacroscopic superpositionsmore clearly. Given twomacroscopically
distinct states ψa and ψb, a superposition of the type ψ = aψa + bψb is called a
pure state. Since the states ψa and ψb can interfere, one also talks about a (phase) coherent
superposition. In the case of a superposition of macroscopically distinct states, the scalar
product ψ†
aψb is obviously vanishing. In case of a coherent superposition, the coefficient
product a∗b is different from zero. This fact can also be expressed with the help of the
density matrix ρ of the system, defined as ρ = ψ ⊗ ψ†. In the present case it is given by
ρpure = ψ ⊗ ψ† = |a|2ψa ⊗ ψ†
a + |b|2ψb ⊗ ψ†
b + a b∗ψa ⊗ ψ†
b + a∗ b ψb ⊗ ψ†
a
= (ψa, ψb) 󶀥|a|2 a b∗
a∗ b |b|2󶀵󶀥ψ†
a
ψ†
b
󶀵. (65)
* Most what can be said about this topic has been said by two people: John von Neumann, who in the
Ref. 88 nineteen-thirties stressed the differences between evolution and decoherence, and byHans Dieter Zeh, who
Ref. 89 in the nineteen-seventies stressed the importance of baths and the environment in the decoherence process.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
134 7 superpositions and probabilities
We can then say that whenever the system is in a pure, or coherent state, then its density
matrix, or density functional, contains off-diagonal terms of the same order ofmagnitude
as the diagonal ones.* Such a densitymatrix corresponds to the above-mentioned strange
situations that we never observe in daily life.
Wenowhave a look at the opposite situation, adensitymatrix formacroscopicdistinct
states with vanishing off-diagonal elements. For two states, the example
ρmixed = |a|2ψa ⊗ ψ†
a + |b|2ψb ⊗ ψ†
b
= (ψa, ψb) 󶀥|a|2 0
0 |b|2󶀵󶀥ψ†
a
ψ†
b
󶀵 (67)
describes a system which possesses no phase coherence at all. (Here, ⊗ denotes the noncommutative
dyadic product or tensor product which produces a tensor or matrix starting
from two vectors.) Such a diagonal density matrix cannot be that of a pure state;
the density matrix describes a system which is in the state ψa with probability |a|2 and
which is in the state ψb with probability |b|2. Such a system is said to be in a mixed state,
because its state is not known, or equivalently, to be in a (phase) incoherent superposition,
because interference effects cannot be observed in such a situation. A system described
by a mixed state is always either in the state ψa or in the state ψb. In otherwords, a diagonal
density matrix for macroscopically distinct states is not in contrast, but in agreement
with everyday experience. In the picture of density matrices, the non-diagonal elements
contain the difference between normal, i.e., incoherent, and unusual, i.e., coherent, superpositions.
The experimental situation is clear: for macroscopically distinct states, (almost) only
diagonal density matrices are observed in everyday life. Almost all systems in a coherent
macroscopic superposition somehow lose their off-diagonal matrix elements. How does
this process of decoherence** take place? The density matrix itself shows the way.
Decoherence is due to baths
In thermodynamics, the density matrix for a large Ref. 90 system is used for the definition of its
Challenge 110 ny entropy and of all its other thermodynamic quantities.These studies show that
S = −k tr (ρ ln ρ) (68)
where tr denotes the trace, i.e., the sumof all diagonal elements.We also remind ourselves
that a system with a large and constant entropy is called a bath. In simple physical terms,
a bath is a systemto which we can ascribe a temperature.More precisely, a (physical) bath,
* Using the density matrix, we can rewrite the evolution equation of a quantum system:
̇ ψ = −iHψ becomes
dρ
dt
= −iħ
[H, ρ]. (66)
Both are completely equivalent. (The new expression is sometimes also called the von Neumann equation.)
We won’t actually do any calculations here.The expressions are given so that you recognize them when you
encounter them elsewhere.
** In certain settings, decoherence is called disentanglement, as we will see below.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 135
or (thermodynamic) reservoir, is any large system for which the concept of equilibrium
can be defined. Experiments show that in practice, this is equivalent to the condition
that a bath consists of many interacting subsystems. For this reason, all macroscopic
quantities describing the state of a bath show small, irregular fluctuations, a property
that will be of central importance shortly.
An everyday bath is also a physical bath: indeed, a thermodynamic bath is similar
to an extremely large warm water bath, one for which the temperature does not change
even if one adds some cold or warmwater to it.Examples of physical baths are an intense
magnetic field, a large amount of gas, or a large solid. (The meanings of ‘intense’ and
‘large’ of course depend on the system under study.) The physical concept of bath (or
reservoir) is thus an abstraction and a generalization of the everyday concept of bath.
It is easy to see from the definition (68) of entropy that the loss of off-diagonal elements
corresponds Challenge 111 s to an increase in entropy. And it is known that any increase in entropy
of a reversible system, such as the quantum mechanical system in question, is due
to an interaction with a bath.
In short, decoherence is due to interaction with a bath.We will now show that baths
are everywhere, that decoherence thus takes place everywhere and all the time, and that
therefore, macroscopic superpositions are (almost) never observed.
How baths lead to decoherence – scattering
Where is the bath interacting with a typical system?The bathmust be outside the system
one is talking about, i.e., in its environment. Indeed, we know experimentally that a typical
environment is large and characterized by a temperature. Some examples are listed in
Table 6. Any environment therefore a bath.We can even go further: for every experimental
situation, there is a bath interacting with the systemunder study. Indeed, every system
which can be observed is not isolated, as it obviously interacts at least with the observer;
and every observer by definition contains a bath, as we will show in more detail shortly.
Usually however, the most important baths we have to take into consideration are the
atmosphere around a system, the radiation or electromagnetic fields interacting with the
system, or, if the system itself is large enough to have a temperature, those degrees of
freedom of the system which are not involved in the superposition under investigation.
Since every system is in contact with a bath, every density matrix of a macroscopic
superposition will lose its diagonal elements eventually. At first sight, this direction of
thought is not convincing.The interactions of a systemwith its environment can bemade
extremely small by using clever experimental set-ups; that would imply that the time
for decoherence can be made extremely large.Thus we need to check how much time a
superposition of states needs to decohere. It turns out that there are two standard ways to
estimate the decoherence time: either by modelling the bath as large number of colliding
particles, or by modelling it as a continuous field.
If the bath is described as a set of particles randomly hitting the microscopic system,
it is best characterized by the effective wavelength λeff of the particles and by the average
Challenge 112 ny interval thit between two hits. A straightforward calculation shows that the decoherence
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
136 7 superpositions and probabilities
TABLE 6 Common and less common baths with their main properties.
Bat h t y p e Temp e r -
at u r e
Wav e -
l e n g t h
Pa r -
t i c l e
f lu x
C ro s s
s e c t i o n
( at om)
H i t t ime
1/σφ f o r
T λeff φ σ at oma ba l la
matter baths
solid, liquid 300K 10 pm 1031 /m2s 10−19 m2 10−12s 10−25 s
air 300K 10 pm 1028 /m2s 10−19 m2 10−9s 10−22 s
laboratory vacuum 50mK 10 μm 1018 /m2s 10−19 m2 10 s 10−12 s
photon baths
sunlight 5800K 900nm 1023 /m2s 10−4s 10−17 s
‘darkness’ 300K 20 μm 1021 /m2s 10−2s 10−15 s
cosmic microwaves 2.7K 2mm 1017 /m2s 102s 10−11 s
terrestrial radio waves
Casimir effect very large
Unruh radiation of Earth 40 zK very large
nuclear radiation baths
radioactivity 10 fm 1 /m2s 10−25 m2 1025s 1012 s
cosmic radiation >1000K 10 fm 10−2 /m2s 10−25 m2 1027s 1014 s
solar neutrinos ≈ 10MK 10 fm 1011 /m2s 10−47 m2 1036s 1015 s
cosmic neutrinos 2.0K 3mm 1017 /m2s 10−62 m2 1045s 1024 s
gravitational baths
gravitational radiation 5 ⋅ 1031K 10−35 m very large
a. Values are rough estimates. The macroscopic ball is assumed to have a 1mmsize.
time td is in any case smaller than this time interval, so that
td ⩽ thit = 1
φσ
, (69)
where φ is the flux of particles and σ the cross-section for the hit.* Typical values are given
in Table 6.We easily note that for macroscopic objects, decoherence times are extremely
*The decoherence time is derived by studying the evolution of the density matrix ρ(x, x󳰀) of objects localized
at two points x and x󳰀. One finds that the off-diagonal elements follow ρ(x, x󳰀 , t) = ρ(x, x󳰀, 0)e−Λt(x−x󳰀)2 ,
where the localization rate Λ is given by
Λ = k2φσeff (70)
where k is the wave number, φ the flux and σeff the cross-section of the collisions, i.e., usually the size of the
Ref. 91 macroscopic object.
One also finds the surprising result that a system hit by a particle of energy Ehit collapses the density
Ref. 92 matrix roughly down to the de Broglie (or thermal de Broglie) wavelength of the hitting particle. Both
results together give the formula above.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 137
short. (We also note that nuclear and gravitational effects lead to large decoherence times
and thus can be neglected.) Scattering leads to fast decoherence of macroscopic systems.
However, for atoms or smaller systems, the situation is different, as expected.
We note that the quantum of action ħ appears in the expression for the decoherence
time, as it appears in the area σ. Decoherence is a quantum process.
How baths lead to decoherence – relaxation
A secondmethod to estimate the decoherence time is also common. Any interaction of a
system with a bath is described by a relaxation time tr.The termrelaxation designates any
processwhich leads to the return to the equilibriumstate.The terms damping and friction
are also used. In the present case, the relaxation time describes the return to equilibrium
of the combination bath and system. Relaxation is an example of an irreversible evolution.
A process is called irreversible if the reversed process, in which every component moves
in opposite direction, is of very low probability.* For example, it is usual that a glass
of wine poured into a bowl of water colours the whole water; it is very rarely observed
that the wine and the water separate again, since the probability of all water and wine
molecules to change directions together at the same time is rather low, a state of affairs
making the happiness of wine producers and the despair of wine consumers.
Now let us simplify the description of the bath. We approximate it by a single, unspecified,
scalar field which interacts with the quantum system. Due to the continuity
of space, such a field has an infinity of degrees of freedom.They are taken to model the
many degrees of freedom of the bath.The field is assumed to be in an initial state where
its degrees of freedom are excited in a way described by a temperature T. The interaction
of the system with the bath, which is at the origin of the relaxation process, can be
described by the repeated transfer of small amounts of energy Ehit until the relaxation
process is completed.
The objects of interest in this discussion, like the mentioned cat, person or car, are
described by a mass m.Their main characteristic is the maximum energy Er which can
be transferred from the system to the environment. This energy describes the interactions
between system and environment.The superpositions of macroscopic states we are
interested in are solutions of the Hamiltonian evolution of these systems.
The initial coherence of the superposition, so disturbingly in contrast with our every-
* Beware of other definitions which try to make something deeper out of the concept of irreversibility, such
as claims that ‘irreversible’ means that the reversed process is not at all possible. Many so-called ‘contradictions’
between the irreversibility of processes and the reversibility of evolution equations are due to this
mistaken interpretation of the term ‘irreversible’.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
138 7 superpositions and probabilities
day experience, disappears exponentially within Ref. 93 a decoherence time td given by*
td = tr
Ehit
Er
eEhit/kT − 1
eEhit/kT + 1
(73)
where k is the Boltzmann constant and like above, Er is the maximum energy which can
be transferred from the system to the environment. Note that one always has td ⩽ tr.
After the decoherence time td is elapsed, the system has evolved from the coherent to
the incoherent superposition of states, or, in other words, the density matrix has lost its
off-diagonal terms. One also says that the phase coherence of this system has been destroyed.
Thus, after a time td, the system is found either in the state ψa or in the state ψb,
respectively with the probability |a|2 or |b|2, and not any more in a coherent superposition
which is so much in contradiction with our daily experience. Which final state is
selected depends on the precise state of the bath, whose details were eliminated fromthe
calculation by taking an average over the states of its microscopic constituents.
The important result is that for all macroscopic objects, the decoherence time td is
extremely small. In order to see this more clearly, we can study a special simplified case.
A macroscopic object of mass m, like the mentioned cat or car, is assumed to be at the
same time in two locations separated by a distance l, i.e., in a superposition of the two
corresponding states.We further assume that the superposition is due to the objectmoving
as a quantum mechanical oscillator with frequency ω between the two locations; this
is the simplest possible system that shows superpositions of an object located in two different
positions. The energy of the object is then given by Er = mω2l2, and the smallest
transfer energy Ehit = ħω is the difference between the oscillator levels. In a macroscopic
situation, this last energy ismuch smaller than kT, so that fromthe preceding expression
Ref. 95 we get
td = tr
E2
hit
2Er kT
= tr
ħ2
2mkTl2 = tr
λ2T
l2 (74)
in which the frequency ω has disappeared. The quantity λT = ħ/󵀂2mkT is called the
thermal de Broglie wavelength of a particle.
We note again that the quantum of action ħ appears in the expression for the decoherence
time. Decoherence is a quantum process.
It is straightforward to see that for practically allmacroscopic objects the typical deco-
*This result is derived as in the above case. A system interacting with a bath always has an evolution given
Ref. 94 by the general form
dρ
dt
= −iħ
[H, ρ] − 1
2to
󵠈
j
[Vj ρ,V†
j ] + [Vj , ρV†
j ], (71)
where ρ is the density matrix, H the Hamiltonian, V the interaction, and to the characteristic time of the
Challenge 113 ny interaction. Are you able to see why? Solving this equation, one finds for the elements far from the diagonal
ρ(t) = ρ0e−t/t0 . In other words, they disappear with a characteristic time to. In most situations one has a
relation of the form
t0 = tr
Ehit
Er
= thit (72)
or some variations of it, as in the example above.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 139
herence time td is extremely short. For example, settingm = 1 g, l = 1mmandT = 300K
we get td/tr = 1.3⋅10−39. Even if the interaction between the system and the environment
would be so weak that the system would have as relaxation time the age of the universe,
which is about 4 ⋅ 1017 s, the time td would still be shorter than 5 ⋅ 10−22 s, which is over
a million times faster than the oscillation time of a beam of light (about 2 fs for green
light). For Schrödinger’s cat, the decoherence time would be even shorter. These times
are so short that we cannot even hope to prepare the initial coherent superposition, let
alone to observe its decay or to measure its lifetime.
For microscopic systems however, the situation is different. For example, for an electron
in a solid cooled to liquid helium temperature we have m = 9.1 ⋅ 10−31 kg, and typically
l = 1 nm and T = 4K; we then get td ≈ tr and therefore the system can stay in
a coherent superposition until it is relaxed, which confirms that for this case coherent
effects can indeed be observed if the system is kept isolated. A typical example is the behaviour
of electrons in superconducting Ref. 96 materials.We will mention a few more below.
In 1996 the first actual measurement of decoherence times was published by the Paris
Ref. 97 team led by Serge Haroche. It confirmed the relation between the decoherence time and
the relaxation time, thus showing that the two processes have to be distinguished at microscopic
scale. In the meantime, other experiments confirmed the decoherence process
Ref. 98 with its evolution equation, both for small and large values of td/tr. A particularly beauRef.
99 tiful experiment has been performed in 2004, where the disappearance of two-slit interference
for C70 molecules was observed when a bath interacts with them.
Summary on decoherence, life and death
Our exploration showed that decoherence results from coupling to a bath in the environment.
Decoherence is a statistical, thermodynamic effect. Decoherence follows from
quantum theory and has been confirmed by experiment.
The estimates of decoherence times in everyday life told us that both the preparation
and the survival of superpositions of macroscopically different states is made impossible
by the interaction with any bath found in the environment.This is the case even if the
usualmeasure of this interaction, given by the friction of themotion of the system, is very
small. Even if a macroscopic system is subject to an extremely low friction, leading to a
very long relaxation time, its decoherence time is still vanishingly short. Only carefully
designed and expensive laboratory systems can reach substantial decoherence times.
Our everyday environment is full of baths.Therefore, coherent superpositions of macroscopically
distinct states never appear in everyday life. Cars cannot be in and out of a garage
at the same time.And we cannot be dead and alive at the same time. In agreementwith
Page 144 the explanation, coherent superpositions of macroscopic states appear in some special
laboratory situations.
What is a system? What is ano bject?
In classical physics, a system is a part of nature that can be isolated fromits environment.
However, quantum mechanics tells us that isolated systems do not exist, since interactions
cannot be made vanishingly small.The contradiction can be solved with the results
above: they allow us to define the concept of system with more accuracy.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
140 7 superpositions and probabilities
⊳ A system is any part of nature that interacts incoherently with its environment.
In other words:
⊳ An object is a part of nature interacting with its environment only through
baths.
In particular, we get
⊳ a system is called microscopic or quantum mechanical and can described by
a wave function ψ whenever
— it is almost isolated, with tevol = ħ/ΔE < tr, and
— it is in incoherent Ref. 100 interaction with its environment.
In short, a microscopic or quantum mechanical system can be described by a wave function
only if it interacts incoherently and weakly with its environment. (For such a system,
the energy indeterminacy ΔE is larger than the relaxation energy.) In contrast, a bath is
never isolated in the sense just given, because the evolution time of a bath is alwaysmuch
larger than its relaxation time. Since all macroscopic bodies are in contact with baths –
or even contain one – they cannot be described by a wave function. In particular, it is
impossible to describe any measuring apparatus with the help of a wave function.
We thus conclude:
⊳ Amacroscopic systemis a systemwith a decoherence timemuch shorter than
any other evolution time of its constituents.
Obviously, macroscopic systems also interact incoherently with their environment.Thus
cats, cars and television news speakers are all macroscopic systems.
One possibility is left over by the two definitions: what happens in the situation in
which the interactions with the environment are coherent? We will encounter some examples
shortly. Following the definition, they are neither microscopic nor macroscopic
systems.
⊳ A ‘system’ in which the interaction with its environment is coherent is called
entangled.
Such ‘systems’ are not described by a wave function, and strictly speaking, they are not
systems. In these situations, when the interaction is coherent, one speaks of entanglement.
For example, one says that a particle or set of particles is said to be entangled with its
environment.
Entangled, coherently interacting systems can be divided, but must be disentangled
when doing so.The act of division leads to detached entities; detached entities interact incoherently.
Quantum theory shows that nature is not made of detached entities, but that
it is made of detachable entities. In quantum theory, the criterion of detachment is the
incoherence of interaction. Coherent superpositions imply the surprising consequence
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 141
that there are systems which, even though they look being made of detached parts, are
not. Entanglement poses a limit to detachment. All surprising properties of quantum
mechanics, such as Schrödinger’s cat, are consequences of the classical prejudice that a
system made of two or more parts can obviously be detached into two subsystems without
disturbance. But coherent superpositions, or entangled systems, do not allow detachmentwithout
disturbance.Whenever we assume to be able to detach entangled systems,
we get strange or incorrect conclusions, such as apparent faster-than-light propagation,
or, as one says today, non-local behaviour. Let us have a look at a few typical examples.
Entangled situations are observed in many experiments. For example, when an electron
and a positron annihilate into two photons, the polarisations of these two photons
are entangled, as measured already in 1949. Also when an excited atom decays in steps,
emitting two photons, the photon polarisations are entangled, as was first shown in 1966
with the help of calciumatoms. Similarly, when amolecule in a singlet state, i.e., in a spin
0 state, decays, the spins of the debris are entangled, as observed in the 1970s. Also the
spontaneous parametric down-conversion of photons produces entanglement. When, in
a non-linear optical material, a photon is converted into two photons whose added energies
correspond to the energy of the original photon, the two photons are entangled both
in their polarisation and in their direction. In 2001, the spins of two extremely cold caesium
gas samples, with millions of atoms each and located a few millimetres apart, have
been entangled. Also position entanglement has been regularly observed, for example
for closely spaced ions inside ion traps.
Is quantum theory non-local? A bit about the
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox
“[Mr. Duffy] lived a little distance away from his
body ... James Joyce, A Painful Case”
It is often suggested, incorrectly, that wave function collapse or quantum theory are nonlocal.*
The issue needs clarification.
We start by imagining an electron hitting a screen after passing a slit. Following the
description just deduced, the process proceeds schematically as depicted in Figure 70. A
film of the same process can be seen in the lower left corners on these pages, starting at
page 105.The process has a surprising aspect: due to the short decoherence time, during
this (and any other) wave function collapse the maximum of the wave function changes
position faster than light. Is this reasonable?
A situation is called acausal or non-local if energy is transported faster than light. UsChallenge
114 s ing Figure 70 you can determine the energy velocity involved, using the results on signal
Vol. III, page 117 propagation. The result is a value smaller than c. A wave function maximum moving
faster than light does not imply energy moving faster than light.
In other words, quantum theory contains speeds greater than light, but no energy
Ref. 101 speeds greater than light. In classical electrodynamics, the same happens with the scalar
and the vector potentials if the Coulomb gauge is used.We have also encountered speeds
Vol. II, page 54 faster than that of light in the motion of shadows and in many other observations. Any
*This continues a topic that we know already: we have explored a different type of non-locality, in general
Vol. II, page 264 relativity, earlier on.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1427 superpositions and probabilities
collapse
space
space
slit screen
t1 t2 t3 t4
FIGURE 70 Quantum mechanical
motion: an electron wave function
(actually its module squared) from the
moment it passes a slit until it hits a
screen.
physicist now has two choices: he can be straight, and say that there is no non-locality
in nature; or he can be less straight, and claim there is. In the latter case, he has to claim
that even classical physics is non-local. However, this never happens. On the other hand,
there is a danger in this more provoking usage of the term: a small percentage of those
who say that the world is non-local after a while start to believe that there really are fasterthan-
light effects in nature. These people become prisoners of their muddled thinking;
on the other hands, muddled thinking helps to get more easily into newspapers. In short,
even though the definition of non-locality is not unanimous, here we stick to the stricter
one, and define non-locality as energy transport faster than light.
An often cited thought experiment that shows the pitfalls of non-locality was proposed
by Bohm* in the discussion around the so-called Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen
Ref. 102, Ref. 103 paradox. In the famous EPR paper the three authors try to find a contradiction between
quantum mechanics and common sense. Bohm translated their rather confused paper
into a clear thought experiment. It is shown schematically in Figure 71. When two particles
in a spin 0 state move apart, measuring one particle’s spin orientation implies an
immediate collapse also of the other particle’s spin, namely in the exactly opposite direction.
This happens instantaneously over the whole separation distance; no speed limit is
obeyed. In other words, entanglement seems to lead to faster-than-light communication.
However, in Bohm’s experiment, no energy is transported faster than light. No nonlocality
is present, despite numerous claims of the contrary by certain authors.The two
*David Joseph Bohm(1917–1992) American–British physicist.He codiscovered the Aharonov–Bohmeffect;
he spent a large part of his later life investigating the connections between quantum physics and philosophy.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 143
collapse
detector 1
detector 2
space
time
FIGURE 71 Bohm’s thought
experiment.
entangled electrons belong to one system: assuming that they are separate only because
the wave function has two distant maxima is a conceptual mistake. In fact, no signal can
be transmitted with this method; the decoherence is a case of prediction which looks
like a signal without being one. Bohm’s experiment, like any other EPR-like experiment,
does not allow communication faster than light. We already discussed such cases in the
Vol. III, page 120 section on electrodynamics.
Bohm’s experiment has actually been performed. The first and most famous realizaRef.
104 tion was due, in 1982, by Alain Aspect; he used photons instead of electrons. Like all latter
tests, it has fully confirmed quantum mechanics.
In fact, experiments such as the one by Aspect confirm that it is impossible to treat
either of the two particles as a system by itself; it is impossible to ascribe any physical
property, such as a spin orientation, to either of them alone. (The Heisenberg picture
would express this restriction even more clearly.)
The mentioned two examples of apparent non-locality can be dismissed with the remark
that since obviously no energy flux faster than light is involved, no problems with
causality appear.Therefore the following example ismore interesting.Take two identical
atoms, one in an excited state, one in the ground state, and call l the distance that separates
them. Common sense tells that if the first atom returns to its ground state emitting
a photon, the second atom can be excited only after a time t = l/c has been elapsed, i.e.,
after the photon has travelled to the second atom.
Surprisingly, this conclusion is wrong. The atom in its ground state has a non-zero
probability to be excited at the same moment in which the first is de-excited.This has
Ref. 105 been shown most simply by Gerhard Hegerfeldt. This result has also been confirmed
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
144 7 superpositions and probabilities
experimentally.
More careful studies show that the result depends on the type of superposition of the
two atoms at the beginning: coherent or incoherent. For incoherent superpositions, the
intuitive result is correct; the counter-intuitive result appears only for coherent superpositions.
Again, a careful discussion shows that no real non-locality of energy is involved.
In summary, faster-than-light speeds in wave function collapse do not contradict the
limit on energy speed of special relativity. Collapse speeds are phase velocities. In nature,
phase velocities are unlimited; unlimited phase velocities never imply energy transport
faster than light.
Curiosities and fun challenges about superpositions
Can a photograph show an object at two different Challenge 115 s places at the same time?
∗∗
In a few cases, the superposition of differentmacroscopic states can actually be observed
by lowering the temperature to sufficiently small values and by carefully choosing suitably
small masses or distances. Two well-known examples of coherent superpositions
are those observed in gravitational wave detectors and in Josephson junctions. In the
Ref. 95 first case, one observes a mass as heavy as 1000 kg in a superposition of states located
at different points in space: the distance between them is of the order of 10−17 m. In
the second case, in superconducting rings, superpositions of a state in which a macroscopic
current of the order of 1 pA flows in clockwise direction with one where it flows
Ref. 106 in counter-clockwise direction have been produced.
∗∗
Ref. 107 Superpositions of magnetization in up and down direction at the same time have also be
observed for several materials.
∗∗
Some people wrongly state that an atom that is in a superposition of states centred at
different positions has been photographed. (This lie is even used by some sects to attract
Challenge 116 s believers.)Why is this not true?
∗∗
Since the 1990s, the sport of finding and playing with new systems in coherent macroRef.
108 scopic superpositions has taken off across the world.The challenges lie in the clean experiments
necessary. Experiments with single atoms in superpositions of states are among
Ref. 109 the most popular ones.
∗∗
Ref. 110 In 1997, coherent atom waves were extracted from a cloud of sodium atoms.
∗∗
Macroscopic objects usually are in incoherent states. This is the same situation as for
light. The world is full of ‘macroscopic’, i.e., incoherent light: daylight, and all light from
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 145
lamps, from fire and from glow-worms is incoherent. Only very special and carefully
constructed sources, such as lasers or small point sources, emit coherent light.Only these
sources allow studying interference effects. In fact, the terms ‘coherent’ and ‘incoherent’
originated in optics, since for light the difference between the two, namely the capacity
to interfere, had been observed centuries before the case of matter.
Coherence and incoherence of light and of mattermanifest themselves differently, because
matter can stay at rest but light cannot and because matter is made of fermions,
Page 129 but light is made of bosons. Coherence can be observed easily in systems composed of
bosons, such as light, sound in solids, or electron pairs in superconductors. Coherence
is less easily observed in systems of fermions, such as systems of atoms with their electron
clouds. However, in both cases a decoherence time can be defined. In both cases
coherence in many particle systems is best observed if all particles are in the same state
(superconductivity, laser light) and in both cases the transition fromcoherent to incoherent
is due to the interaction with a bath. A beam is thus incoherent if its particles arrive
randomly in time and in frequency. In everyday life, the rarity of observation of coherent
matter superpositions has the same origin as the rarity of observation of coherent light.
∗∗
We will discuss the relation between the environment and the decay of unstable systems
Vol. V, page 44 later on.The phenomenon is completely described by the concepts given here.
∗∗
Challenge 117 ny Can you find a method to measure the degree of entanglement? Can you do so for a
system made of many particles?
∗∗
The study of entanglement leads to a simple conclusion: teleportation contradicts correlaChallenge
118 ny tion. Can you confirm the statement?
∗∗
Are ghost images in TV sets, often due to spurious reflections, examples of interference?
Challenge 119 s
∗∗
Challenge 120 d What happens when two monochromatic electrons overlap?
∗∗
Some people say that quantum theory could be used for quantum computing, by using
Ref. 111 coherent superpositions of wave functions. Can you give a general reason that makes
this aim very difficult – even though not impossible – even without knowing how such
Challenge 121 s a quantum computer might work, or what the so-called qubits might be?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
146 7 superpositions and probabilities
Why do probabilities and wave function collapse appear in
measurements?
Measurements in quantum mechanics are puzzling also because they lead to statements
in which probabilities appear. For example, we speak about the probability of finding
an electron at a certain distance from the nucleus of an atom. Statements like this belong
to the general type ‘when the observable A is measured, the probability to find the
outcome a is p.’ In the following we will show that the probabilities in such statements
are inevitable for any measurement, because, as we will show, (1) any measurement and
any observation is a special case of decoherence or disentanglement process and (2) all
decoherence processes imply the quantum of action. (Historically, the process of measurement
was studied before the more general process of decoherence.That explains in
part why the topic is so confused in many peoples’ minds.)
What is a measurement? As already Vol. III, page 219 mentioned earlier on, a measurement is any interaction
which produces a record or a memory. (Any effect of everyday life is a record;
but this is not true in general. Can you give some examples of effects that are records and
Challenge 122 s some effects which are not?) Measurements can be performed by machines; when they
are performed by people, they are called observations. In quantumtheory, the process of
measurement is not as straightforward as in classical physics. This is seenmost strikingly
when a quantum system, such as a single electron, is first made to pass a diffraction slit,
or better – in order to make its wave aspect become apparent – a double slit and then
is made to hit a photographic plate, in order to make also its particle aspect appear. Experiment
shows that the blackened dot, the spot where the electron has hit the screen,
cannot be determined in advance. (The same is true for photons or any other particle.)
However, for large numbers of electrons, the spatial distribution of the black dots, the
so-called diffraction pattern, can be calculated in advance with high precision.
The outcome of experiments on microscopic systems thus forces us to use probabilities
for the description of microsystems. We find that the probability distribution p(x)
of the spots on the photographic plate can be calculated fromthewave function ψ of the
electron at the screen surface and is given by p(x) = |ψ†(x)ψ(x)|2.This is in fact a special
case of the general first property of quantum measurements:
⊳ The measurement of an observable A for a system in a state ψ gives as result
one of the eigenvalues an, and the probability Pn to get the result an is given
by
Pn = |φ†
nψ|2, (75)
where φn is the eigenfunction of the operator A corresponding to the eigenvalue
an.*
* All linear transformations transform some special vectors, called eigenvectors (from the German word
eigen meaning ‘self ’) into multiples of themselves. In other words, if T is a transformation, e a vector, and
T(e) = λe (76)
where λ is a scalar, then the vector e is called an eigenvector of T, and λ is associated eigenvalue. The set of
all eigenvalues of a transformation T is called the spectrum of T.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 147
gravity
ball
pegs
FIGURE 72 A system showing probabilistic behaviour: ball
falling through an array of pegs.
Experiments also show a second property of quantum measurements:
⊳ After a measurement, the observed quantum system is in the state φn corresponding
to the measured eigenvalue an. One also says that during the
measurement, the wave Ref. 112 function has collapsed from ψ to φn.
These two experimental properties can also be generalized to themore general cases with
degenerate and continuous eigenvalues.
Obviously, these experimental results require an explanation. At first sight, the sort of
probabilities encountered in quantum theory are different from the probabilities we encounter
in everyday life. Take roulette, dice, the system shown in Figure 72, pachinko
machines or the direction in which a pencil on its tip falls: all have beenmeasured experimentally
to be random (assuming no cheating by the designer or operators) to a high
degree of accuracy.These everyday systems do not puzzle us.We unconsciously assume
that the randomoutcome is due to the small, but uncontrollable variations of the starting
conditions or the environment every time the experiment is repeated.*
But microscopic systems seem to be different. The two properties of quantum measurements
just mentioned express what physicists observe in every experiment, even if
the initial conditions are taken to be exactly the same every time. But why then is the
position for a single electron, or most other observables of quantum systems, not predictable?
In other words, what happens during the collapse of the wave function? How
long does the collapse take? In the beginning of quantum theory, there was the perception
that the observed unpredictability is due to the lack of information about the state of
the particle. This lead many to search for so-called ‘hidden variables’. All these attempts
were doomed to fail, however. It took some time for the scientific community to realize
that the unpredictability is not due to the lack of information about the state of the
particle, which is indeed described completely by the state vector ψ.
In order to uncover the origin of probabilities, let us recall the nature of a measurement,
or better, of a general observation. Any observation is the production of a record.
The record can be a visual or auditivememory in our brain, or a written record on paper,
* To get a feeling for the limitations of these unconscious assumptions, you may want to read the already
mentioned story of those physicists who built a machine that could predict the outcome of a roulette ball
Vol. I, page 113 from the initial velocity imparted by the croupier.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
148 7 superpositions and probabilities
or a tape recording, or any such type of object. As explained Vol. III, page 217 in the previous volume, an
object is a record if it cannot have arisen or disappeared by chance. To avoid the influence
of chance, all records have to be protected as much as possible from the external
world; e.g. one typically puts archives in earthquake safe buildings with fire protection,
keeps documents in a safe, avoids brain injury as much as possible, etc.
On top of this, records have to be protected from their internal fluctuations. These
internal fluctuations are due to the many components any recording device is made of.
If the fluctuations were too large, they would make it impossible to distinguish between
the possible contents of a memory. Now, fluctuations decrease with increasing size of a
system, typically with the square root of the size. For example, if a hand writing is too
small, it is difficult to read if the paper gets brittle; if the magnetic tracks on tapes are
too small, they demagnetize and lose the stored information. In other words, a record is
rendered stable against internal fluctuations by making it of sufficient size. Every record
thus consists of many components and shows small fluctuations.
The importance of size can be expressed in another way: every system with memory,
i.e., every system capable of producing a record, contains a bath. In summary, the statement
that any observation is the production of a record can be expressed more precisely
as: Any observation of a system is the result of an interaction between that system and a
bath in the recording apparatus.*
In addition, any observation measuring a physical quantity uses an interaction depending
on that same quantity.With these seemingly trivial remarks, we can describe in
more detail the process of observation, or, as it is usually called in the quantum theory,
the measurement process.
Anymeasurement apparatus, or detector, is characterized by twomain aspects, shown
in Figure 73: the interaction it has with the microscopic system, and the bath it contains
Ref. 113 to produce the record. Any description of the measurement process thus is the description
of the evolution of the microscopic system and the detector; therefore one needs
the Hamiltonian for the particle, the interaction Hamiltonian, and the bath properties
(such as the relaxation time tr). The interaction specifies what is measured and the bath
realizes the memory.
We know that only classical thermodynamic systems can be irreversible; quantum
systems are not. We therefore conclude: a measurement system must be described classically:
otherwise it would have no memory and would not be a measurement system: it
would not produce a record! Memory is a classical effect. (More precisely, memory is an
effect that only appears in the classical limit.) Nevertheless, let us see what happens if we
describe the measurement system quantum mechanically.
Let us call A the observable which is measured in the experiment and its eigenfunctions
φn.We describe the quantummechanical systemunder observation – often a particle
– by a state ψ.The full state of the system can always be written as
ψ = ψp ψother = 󵠈
n
cnφn ψother. (77)
Here, ψp is the aspect of the (particle or system) state that we want tomeasure, and ψother
* Since baths imply friction, we can also say: memory needs friction.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 149
the quantum
mechanical
system
apparatus, e.g. eye, ear,
or machine, with memory,
i.e. coupled to a bath
is determined
by the type
of measurement
describes its
friction, e.g.
due to heat flow
H H t
describes
its possible
states
int r
FIGURE 73 The concepts used
in the description of
measurements.
represents all other degrees of freedom, i.e., those not described – spanned, inmathematical
language – by the operator A corresponding to the observable we want to measure.
The numbers cn = |φ†
nψp| give the expansion of the state ψp, which is taken to be normalized,
in terms of the basis φn. For example, in a typical position measurement, the
functions φn would be the position eigenfunctions and ψother would contain the information
about the momentum, the spin and all other properties of the particle.
How does the system–detector interaction look like? Let us call the state of the apparatus
before the measurement χstart. The measurement apparatus itself, by definition, is
a device which, when it is hit by a particle in the state φnψother, changes from the state
χstart to the state χn. One then says that the apparatus has measured the eigenvalue an
corresponding to the eigenfunction φn of the operator A. The index n is thus the record
of the measurement; it is called the pointer index or variable. This index tells us in which
state the microscopic systemwas before the interaction.The important point, taken from
our previous discussion, is that the states χn, being records, are macroscopically distinct,
precisely in the sense of the previous section. Otherwise they would not be records, and
the interaction with the detector would not be a measurement.
Of course, during measurement, the apparatus sensitive to φn changes the part ψother
of the particle state to some other situation ψother,n, which depends on the measurement
and on the apparatus; we do not need to specify it in the following discussion.* But let
* How does the interaction look like mathematically? From the description we just gave, we specified the
final state for every initial state. Since the two density matrices are related by
ρf = TρiT† (78)
Challenge 123 ny we can deduce the Hamiltonian from the matrix T. Are you able to see how?
By the way, one can say in general that an apparatus measuring an observable A has a system interaction
Hamiltonian depending on the pointer variable A, and for which one has
[H + Hint , A] = 0. (79)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
150 7 superpositions and probabilities
us have an intermediate check of our reasoning. Do apparatuses as described here exist?
Yes, they do. For example, any photographic plate is a detector for the position of ionizing
particles. A plate, and in general any apparatus measuring position, does this by
changing its momentum in a way depending on the measured position: the electron on
a photographic plate is stopped. In this case, χstart is a white plate, φn would be a particle
localized at spot n, χn is the function describing a plate blackened at spot n and ψother,n
describes the momentum and spin of the particle after it has hit the photographic plate
at the spot n.
Now we are ready to look at the measurement process itself. For the moment, let us
disregard the bath in the detector, and let us just describe it with a state as well, which
we call χstart. In the time before the interaction between the particle and the detector, the
combined system (including the detector) was in the initial state ψi given simply by
ψi = ψp χstart = 󵠈
n
cnφnψother χstart, (80)
where ψp is the (particle or system) state. After the interaction, using the just mentioned,
experimentally known characteristics of the apparatus, the combined state ψa is
ψa = 󵠈
n
cnφnψother,n χn. (81)
This evolution from ψi to ψa follows from the evolution equation applied to the particle–
detector combination. Now, the combined state ψa is a superposition of macroscopically
distinct states: it is a superposition of distinct macroscopic states of the detector. In our
example ψa could correspond to a superposition of one state where a spot on the left
upper corner is blackened on an otherwise white plate with another state where a spot
on the right lower corner of the otherwise white plate is blackened. Such a situation is
never observed. Let us see why.
The density matrix ρa of the combined state ψa after the measurement, given by
ρa = ψa ⊗ ψ†
a = 󵠈
n,m
cnc∗
m(φnψother,n χn) ⊗ (φmψother,mχm)†, (82)
contains large non-diagonal terms, i.e., terms for n ̸= m, whose numerical coefficients
are different from zero. Now let us take the bath back in. From the previous section we
know the effect of a bath on such a macroscopic superposition.We found that a density
matrix such as ρa decoheres extremely rapidly. We assume here that the decoherence
time is negligibly small.* After decoherence, the off-diagonal terms vanish, and only the
* Note however, that an exactly vanishing decoherence time, which would mean a strictly infinite number
of degrees of freedom of the bath or the environment, is in contradiction with the evolution equation, and
in particular with unitarity, locality and causality. It is essential in the whole argument not to confuse the
logical consequences of a extremely small decoherence time with those of an exactly vanishing decoherence
time.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 151
final, diagonal density matrix ρf, given by
ρf = 󵠈
n
|cn|2(φnψother,n χn) ⊗ (φnψother,n χn)† (83)
remains and has experimental relevance. As explained above, such a density matrix describes
a mixed state, and the numbers Pn = |cn|2 = |φ†
nψp|2 give the probability of measuring
the value an and of finding the particle in the state φnψother,n as well as the detector
in the state χn. But this is precisely what the two properties of quantum measurements
state.
We therefore find that describing a measurement as an evolution of a quantum system
interacting with a macroscopic detector, itself containing a bath, we can deduce the
two properties of quantummeasurements, probabilistic outcomes and the collapse of the
wave function, fromthe quantummechanical evolution equation.The decoherence time
td of the previous section becomes the time of collapse for the case of a measurement; in
addition we find
tcollapse = td < tr. (84)
In other words, the collapse time is always smaller than the relaxation time of the bath.
We thus have a formula for the time the wave function takes to collapse. All experimental
measurements of the time of collapse have Ref. 114 confirmed this result.
Why is ħ necessary for probabilities?
At first sight, one could argue that the two properties of quantum measurements do not
contain ħ, and thus are not consequences of quantum theory. However, this argument is
incorrect.
Decoherence is a quantum process, because ħ appears in the expression of the decoherence
time. Since the collapse of the wave function is based on decoherence, it is a
quantum process as well. Also probabilities are due to the quantum of action.
In addition,we have seen that the concept of wave function appears only because the
Page 79 quantum of action ħ is not zero.Wave functions, their collapse and probabilities are due
to the quantum of change ħ.
Page 30 These results recall a statement made earlier on: probabilities appear whenever an
experiment attempts to detect changes, i.e., action values, smaller than ħ. Most puzzles
Challenge 124 e around measurement are due to such attempts. However, nature does not allow such
measurements; therefore, probabilities appear.
Hiddenv ariables
A large number of people are not satisfiedwith the explanation of probabilities.They long
for more mystery in quantum theory.They do not like the idea that probabilities are due
to baths and to the quantum of action.The most famous prejudice such people cultivate
is the idea that the probabilities are due to some hidden aspect of nature which is still
unknown to humans. Such imagined, unknown aspects are called hidden variables.
The beautiful thing about quantum mechanics is that it allows both conceptual and
experimental tests on whether such hidden variables exist without the need of know-
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1527 superpositions and probabilities
ing them. Of course, hidden variables controlling the evolution of microscopic system
would contradict the result that action values below ħ cannot be detected.This smallest
observable action value is the reason for the random behaviour of microscopic systems.
A smallest action thus excludes hidden variables. But let us add some more detailed arguments.
Historically, the first argument against hidden variables was given by John von Neumann.*
An additional no-go theorem for hidden variables was published by Kochen
Ref. 115 and Specker in 1967, (and independently by Bell in 1969). The theorem states that noncontextual
hidden variables are impossible, if the Hilbert space has a dimension equal or
larger than three.The theorem is about non-contextual variables, i.e., about hidden variables
inside the quantum mechanical system.The Kochen–Specker theorem thus states
that there is no non-contextual hidden variables model, because mathematics forbids
it. This result essentially eliminates all possibilities for hidden variables, because usual
quantum mechanical systems have Hilbert space dimensions larger than three.
Of course, one cannot avoid noting that there are no restricting theorems about contextual
hidden variables, i.e., variables in the environment and in particular, in the baths
contained in it. Indeed, their necessity was shown above.
Also common sense eliminates hidden variables, without any recourse to mathematics,
with a simple argument. If a quantum mechanical system had internal hidden variables,
the measurement apparatus would have zillions of them.** And this would mean
that it could not work as a measurement system.
Despite all arguments, researchers have looked for experimental tests on hidden variables.
Most tests are based on the famed Bell’s inequality, a beautifully simple relation
published by John Bell*** in the 1960s.
The starting idea is to distinguish quantum theory and locally realistic theories using
hidden variables by measuring the polarizations of two correlated photons. Quantum
theory says that the polarization of the photons is fixed only at the time it is measured,
whereas local realisticmodels – themost straightforward type of hidden variablemodels
– claim that it is fixed already in advance by a hidden variable. Interestingly, experiments
can be used to decide which approach is correct.
Imagine that the polarization ismeasured at two distant points Aand B. Eachobserver
can measure 1 or −1 in each of his favourite direction. Let each observer choose two
directions, 1 and 2, and call their results a1, a2, b1 and b2. Since the measurement results
all are either 1 or −1, the value of the specific expression (a1 + a2)b1 + (a2 − a1)b2 has
always the value ±2.
Ref. 116 Imagine you repeat the experiment many times, assuming that the hidden variables
appear statistically. You then can deduce (a special case of) Bell’s inequality for two hid-
* János von Neumann (b. 1903 Budapest, d. 1957Washington DC) Hungarian mathematician. One of the
greatest and clearestminds of the twentieth century, he settled already many questions, especially in applied
mathematics and quantum theory, that others still struggle with today. He worked on the atomic and the
hydrogen bomb, on ballistic missiles, and on general defence problems. In another famous project, he build
the first US-American computer, building on his extension of the ideas of Konrad Zuse.
**Which leads to the definition: one zillion is 1023.
*** John Stewart Bell (1928–1990), theoretical physicist who workedmainly on the foundations of quantum
theory.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 153
Challenge 125 e den variables; it predicts that
|(a1b1) + (a2b1) + (a2b2) − (a1b2)| ⩽ 2 . (85)
Here, the expressions in brackets are the averages of the measurement products over a
large number of samples. This hidden variable prediction holds independently of the
directions of the involved polarizers.
On the other hand, for the case that the polarizers 1 and 2 at position A and the
corresponding ones at position B are chosen with angles of π/4, quantumtheory predicts
that
|(a1b1) + (a2b1) + (a2b2) − (a1b2)| = 2󵀂2 > 2 . (86)
This prediction is in complete contradiction with the hidden variable result.
All experimental checks of Bell’s equation have confirmed standard quantummechanics.
There are no exceptions.
Another measurable contradiction between quantum theory and locally realistic theories
has been predicted by Greenberger, Horn and Zeilinger in systems with three enRef.
117 tangled particles. Again, quantum theory has been confirmed in all experiments.
In summary, no evidence for hidden variables has ever been found. Of course, this
is not really surprising. The search for hidden variables is based on a misunderstanding
of quantum mechanics or on personal desires on how the world should be, instead of
taking it as it is: there is a smallest measurable action value, ħ, in nature.
Summary on probabilities and determinism
“Geometric demonstramus quia facimus; si
physics demonstrare possemus, faceremus. Giambattista Vico*”
Fromthe arguments presented here we draw a number of conclusions which we need for
the rest of our mountain ascent. Note that these conclusions, even though in agreement
with experiments, are not yet shared by all physicists!The whole topic is a problemfor
people who prefer ideology to facts.
— Probabilities do not appear inmeasurements because the state of the quantumsystem
is unknown or fuzzy, but because the detailed state of the bath in the environment is
unknown. Quantum mechanical probabilities are of statistical origin and are due to
baths in the environment (or in the measurement apparatus), in combination with the
quantum of action ħ.The probabilities are due to the large number of degrees of freedom
contained in any bath. These large numbers make the outcome of experiments
unpredictable. If the state of the bath were known, the outcome of an experiment
could be predicted.The probabilities of quantum theory are ‘thermodynamic’ in origin.
* ‘We are able to demonstrate geometrical matters because we make them; if we could prove physical matters
we would be able to make them.’ Giovanni Battista Vico (b. 1668 Napoli, d. 1744 Napoli) important
Italian philosopher and thinker. In this famous statement he points out a fundamental distinction between
mathematics and physics.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
154 7 superpositions and probabilities
In other words, there are no fundamental probabilities in nature. All probabilities
in nature are due to decoherence; in particular, all probabilities are due to the statistics
of the many particles – some of which may be virtual – that are part of the baths
in the environment. Modifying well-known words by Albert Einstein, ‘nature really
does not play dice.’ We therefore called ψ the wave function instead of ‘probability
amplitude’, as is often done. An even better name would be state function.
— Any observation in everyday life is a special case of decoherence. What is usually
called the ‘collapse of the wave function’ is a decoherence process due to the interaction
with the baths present in the environment or in the measuring apparatus. Because
humans are warm-blooded and have memory, humans themselves are thus
measurement apparatuses. The fact that our body temperature is 37°C is thus the
reason that we see only a single world, and no superpositions. (Actually, there are
many Challenge 126 s additional reasons; can you name a few?)
— A measurement is complete when the microscopic system has interacted with the
bath in themeasuring apparatus. Quantumtheory as a description of nature does not
require detectors; the evolution equation describes all examples of motion. However,
measurements do require the existence of detectors. Detectors, being machines that
record observations, have to include a bath, i.e., have to be classical, macroscopic
objects. In this context one speaks also of a classical apparatus. This necessity of the
measurement apparatus to be classical had been already stressed in the very early
stages of quantum theory.
— All measurements, being decoherence processes that involve interactions with baths,
are irreversible processes and increase entropy.
— A measurement is a special case of quantum mechanical evolution, namely the evolution
for the combination of a quantum system, a macroscopic detector and the environment.
Since the evolution equation is relativistically invariant, no causality problems
appear in measurements; neither do locality problems or logical problems appear.
— Since both the evolution equation and the measurement process does not involve
quantities other than space-time, Hamiltonians, baths and wave-functions, no other
quantity plays a role in measurement. In particular, no human observer nor any consciousness
is involved or necessary. Every measurement is complete when the microscopic
system has interactedwith the bath in the apparatus.The decoherence inherent
in everymeasurement takes place even if nobody is looking.This trivial consequence
is in agreement with the observations of everyday life, for example with the fact that
the Moon is orbiting the Earth even if nobody looks at it.* Similarly, a tree falling in
themiddle of a forest makes noise even if nobody listens.Decoherence is independent
of human observation, of the human mind and of human existence.
— In everymeasurement the quantumsysteminteracts with the detector. Since there is a
minimumvalue for the magnitude of action, every observation influences the observed.
Therefore every measurement disturbs the quantumsystem. Any precise description
of observations must also include the description of this disturbance. In the present
section the disturbance was modelled by the change of the state of the system from
* The opposite view is sometimes falsely attributed to Niels Bohr. The Moon is obviously in contact with
Challenge 127 s many radiation baths. Can you list a few?
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 155
ψother to ψother,n.Without such a change of state,without a disturbance of the quantum
system, a measurement is impossible.
— Since the complete measurement is described by quantum mechanics, unitarity is
and remains the basic property of evolution.There are no non-unitary processes in
quantum mechanics.
— The description of the collapse of the wave function as a decoherence process is an
explanation exactly in the sense in which the term ‘explanation’ was defined earlier
Vol. III, page 279 on; it describes the relation between an observation and all the other aspects of reality,
in this case the bath in the detector or the environment. The collapse of the wave
function has been measured, calculated and explained.The collapse is not a question
of ‘interpretation’, i.e., of opinion, as unfortunately often is suggested.*
— It is not useful to speculate whether the evolution for a single quantum measurement
could be determined if the state of the environment around the system were known.
Measurements need baths. But a bath is, to an excellent approximation, irreversible
and thus cannot be described by a wave function, which behaves reversibly.**
In short:
⊳ Quantum mechanics is deterministic.
⊳ Baths are probabilistic.
In fact, baths are probabilistic because of the quantum of action.
In summary, there is no irrationality in quantum theory.Whoever uses quantum theory
as argument for superstitions, irrational behaviour, new age beliefs or ideologies is
guilty of disinformation.The statement by Gell-Mann at the beginning of this chapter is
Page 132 thus such an example. Another is the following well-known, but incorrect statement by
Richard Feynman:
Ref. 119 ... nobody understands quantum mechanics.
Nobel Prizes obviously do not prevent views distorted by ideology. THe correct statement
is:
⊳ Decoherence and the quantum of action are the key to understanding quantum
theory.
In fact, these two concepts allow clarifying many other issues.We explore a few interesting
ones.
* This implies that the so-called ‘many worlds’ interpretation is wishful thinking. The conclusion is conRef.
118 firmed when studying the details of this religious approach. It is a belief system, not based on facts.
** This very strong type of determinism will be very much challenged in the last part of this text, in which
it will be shown that time is not a fundamental concept, and therefore that the debate around determinism
looses most of its interest.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
156 7 superpositions and probabilities
What is the difference between space and time?
Space and time differ. Objects are localized in space but not in time. Why is this the
case? In nature, most bath–system interactions are mediated by a potential. All potentials
are by definition position dependent. Therefore, every potential, being a function
of the position x, commutes with the position observable (and thus with the interaction
Hamiltonian).The decoherence induced by baths – except if special care is taken – thus
first of all destroys the non-diagonal elements for every superposition of states centred
at different locations. In short, objects are localized because they interact with baths via
potentials.
For the same reason, objects also have only one spatial orientation at a time. If the
system–bath interaction is spin-dependent, the bath leads to ‘localization’ in the spin
variable. This occurs for all microscopic systems interacting with magnets. As a result,
macroscopic superpositions ofmagnetization are almost never observed. Since electrons,
protons and neutrons have a magnetic moment and a spin, this conclusion can even be
extended: everyday objects are never seen in superpositions of different rotation states
because their interactions with baths are spin-dependent.
As a counter-example,most systems are not localized in time, but on the contrary exist
for very long times, because practically all system–bath interactions do not commute
with time. In fact, this is the way a bath is defined to begin with. In short, objects are
permanent because they interact with baths.
Are you able to find an interaction which is momentum-dependent instead of
position-dependent?What Challenge 128 s is the consequence for macroscopic systems?
In other words, in contrast to general relativity, quantum theory produces a distinction
between space and time. In fact, we can define position as the observable that commutes
with interaction Hamiltonians.This distinction between space and time is due to
the properties of matter and its interactions.We could not have deduced this distinction
in general relativity.
Are we good observers?
Are humans classical apparatuses? Yes, they are. Even though several prominent physicists
claim that free will and probabilities are related, a detailed investigation shows that
Ref. 120 this in not the case. Our senses are classical machines because they obey their definition:
human senses record observations by interaction with a bath. Our brain is also a classical
apparatus: the neurons are embedded in baths. Quantum probabilities do not play a
determining role in the brain.
Any observing entity, be it a machine or a human being, needs a bath and a memory
to record its observations. This means that observers have to be made of matter; an observer
cannot be made of radiation. Our description of nature is thus severely biased: we
describe it from the standpoint of matter.That is a bit like describing the stars by putting
the Earth at the centre of the universe: we always put matter at the centre of our descripChallenge
129 e tion. Can we eliminate this basic anthropomorphism? We will find out as we continue.
Vol. VI, page 76
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 157
What relates information theory, cryptology and quantum
theory?
Physics means talking about observations of nature. Like any observation, also measurements
produce information. It is thus possible to translatemuch (but not all) of quantum
theory into the language of information theory. In particular, the existence of a smallest
change value in nature implies that the information about a physical system can never
be complete, that information transport has its limits and that information can never be
fully trusted.The details of these studies form a fascinating way to look at the microscopic
world.
The analogy between quantum theory and information theory becomes even more
interesting when the statements are translated Ref. 121 into the language of cryptology. Cryptology
is the science of transmitting hidden messages that only the intended receiver can
decrypt. In our modern times of constant surveillance, cryptology is an important tool
to protect personal freedom.*
The quantum of action implies that messages can be sent in an (almost) safe way. Listening
to a message is a measurement process. Since there is a smallest action, one can
detect whether somebody has tried to listen to a sent message. A man in the middle attack
– somebody who pretends to be the receiver and then sends a copy of the message
to the real, intended receiver – can be avoided by using entangled systems as signals to
transmit the information. Quantum cryptologists therefore usually use communication
systems based on entangled photons.
The major issue of quantum cryptology, a large modern research field, is the key distribution
problem. All secure communication is based on a secret key that is used to
decrypt the message. Even if the communication channel is of the highest security – like
entangled photons – one still has to find a way to send the communication partner the secret
key necessary for the decryption of the messages. Finding such methods is the main
aspect of quantum cryptology. However, close investigation shows that all key exchange
methods are limited in their security.
In short, due to the quantum of action, nature provides limits on the possibility of
sending encrypted messages.The statement of these limits is (almost) equivalent to the
statement that change in nature is limited by the quantum of action.
Is the universe a computer?
The quantum of action provides a limit to secure information exchange.This connection
allows us to brush aside several incorrect statements often found in the media. Stating
that ‘the universe is information’ or that ‘the universe is a computer’ is as reasonable
Vol. VI, page 101 as saying that the universe is an observation or a chewing-gum dispenser. Any expert
of motion should beware of these and similarly fishy statements; people who use them
either deceive themselves or try to deceive others.
* Cryptology consists of the field of cryptography, the art of coding messages, and the field of cryptoanalysis,
the art of deciphering encrypted messages. For a good introduction to cryptology, see the text by
Albrecht Beutelspacher, Jörg Schwenk & Klaus-Dieter Wolfenstätter, Moderne Verfahren
der Kryptographie, Vieweg 1995.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
158 7 superpositions and probabilities
Does the universe have a wave function? And initial conditions?
The wave function of the universe is frequently invoked in discussions about quantum
theory. Many deduce conclusions from this idea, for example on the irreversibility of
time, on the importance of initial conditions, on changes required to quantum theory
and much more. Are these arguments correct?
The first thing to clarify is the meaning of ‘universe’. Vol. II, page 208 As explained already, the term
can have twomeanings: either the collection of allmatter and radiation, or this collection
plus all of space-time. Let us also recall the meaning of ‘wave function’: it describes the
state of a system. The state distinguishes two otherwise identical systems; for example,
position and velocity distinguish two otherwise identical ivory balls on a billiard table.
Alternatively and equivalently, the state describes changes in time.
Does the universe have a state? If we take the wider meaning of universe, it does not.
Vol. I, page 26 Talking about the state of the universe is a contradiction: by definition, the concept of
state, defined as the non-permanent aspects of an object, is applicable only to parts of
the universe.
We then can take the narrower sense of ‘universe’ – the sumof allmatter and radiation
only – and ask the question again. To determine the state of all matter and radiation, we
need a possibility tomeasure it: we need an environment. But the environment ofmatter
and radiation is space-time only; initial conditions cannot be determined since we need
measurements to do this, and thus an apparatus. An apparatus is a material system with
a bath attached to it; however, there is no such system outside the universe.
In short, quantum theory does not allow for measurements of the universe; therefore
the universe has no state. Beware of anybody who claims to know something about the
wave function of the universe. Just ask him Wheeler’s question: If you know the wave
function of the universe, why aren’t you rich?
Despite this conclusion, several famous physicists have proposed evolution equations
for the wave function of the universe. (The best-known is, ironically, theWheeler–
Ref. 122 DeWitt equation.) It seems a silly point, but not one prediction of these equations has
been compared to experiment; the arguments just given even make this impossible in
principle. Exploring such equations, so interesting it may seem at first sight, must therefore
be avoided if we want to reach the top ofMotionMountain and avoid getting lost in
false beliefs.
There are many additional twists to this story. One twist is that space-time itself, even
without matter,might be a bath. This speculation will be shown to be correct in the last
volume of this adventure. The result seems to allow speaking of the wave function of the
universe. But then again, it turns out that time is undefined at the scales where space-time
is an effective bath; this implies that the concept of state is not applicable there.
A lack of ‘state’ for the universe is a strong statement. It also implies a lack of initial
conditions!The arguments are precisely the same. This is a tough result.We are so used
to think that the universe has initial conditions that we never question the term. (Even
in this text the mistake might appear every now and then.) But there are no initial conditions
for the universe.
We can retain as summary, valid even in the light of the latest research: the universe
is not a system, has no wave function and no initial conditions, independently of what is
meant by ‘universe’.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
7 quantum theory without ideology 159
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
Cha p t e r 8
COLOURS AND OTHER
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN LIGHT
AND MATTER
“Rem tene; verba sequentur.* Cato”
Stone s and all other objects have colours. Why? In other words, what is the
pecific way in which charged quantum particles that are found inside
tones and inside all other objects interact with electromagnetic fields? In this
chapter, we first give an overview of the various ways that colours in nature result from
the quantum of action, i.e., from the interaction between matter quantons and photons.
Then we explore the simplest such system: we show how the quantum of action leads
to the colours of hydrogen atoms. After this, we discover that the interaction between
matter and radiation leads to other surprising effects, especially when special relativity
is taken into account.
The causes of colour
Quantumtheory explains all colours in nature. Indeed, all the colours thatwe observe are
due to charged particles. More precisely, colours are due to the interactions of charged
particles with photons. All colours are thus quantum effects.
The charged particles at the basis of most colours are electrons and nuclei, including
their composites, fromions, atoms andmolecules to fluids and solids.Many colour issues
are still topic of research. For example, until recently it was unclear why exactly asphalt is
black. The exact structure of the chemical compounds, the asphaltenes, that produce the
Ref. 124 very dark brown colour was unknown. Only recent research has settled this question. In
addition, developing new colourants and colour effects is an important part of modern
industry.
An overview of the specific mechanisms that generate colour is given in the following
Ref. 123 table.The table includes all colours that appear in everyday life. (Can you find one that
Challenge 130 s is missing?)
* ‘Know the subject and the words will follow.’ Marcus Porcius Cato, (234–149 bce) or Cato the elder, Roman
politician famous for his speeches and his integrity.
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
8 colours and more 161
TABLE 7 Causes of colour.
C o l o u r t y p e E x a m pl e D eta i l s
Class I: Colours due to simple excitations
1. Incandescence and free charge radiation
Carbon arc lamp, hot steel,
lightbulb wire, most stars,
magma, lava, hot melts
Colours are due to continuous
spectrum emitted by all hot
matter; colour sequence,
given byWien’s rule, is black,
red, orange, yellow, white,
blue-white (molten lead and
silver © Graela)
Wood fire, candle Wood and wax flames are
yellow due to incandescence if
carbon-rich and oxygen-poor
White fireworks, flashlamp,
sparklers
Due to metals burning to
oxide at high temperature,
such as magnesium, zinc, iron,
aluminium or zirconium
(sparkler © Sarah Domingos)
Nuclear reactors,
synchroton light sources,
free electron lasers
Due to fast free charges:
Vavilov–Čerenkov radiation is
due to speed of particle larger
than the speed of light in
matter, Bremsstrahlung is due
to the deceleration of charged
particles (nuclear reactor core
under water, courtesy NASA)
2. Atomic gas excitations
Red neon lamp, blue argon
lamp, UV mercury lamp,
yellow sodium street lamps,
most gas lasers, metal
vapour lasers, some
fluorescence
Colours are due to transitions
between atomic energy levels
(gas discharges © Pslawinski)
Aurora, triboluminescence
in scotch tape,
crystalloluminescence in
strontium bromate
In air, blue and red colours are
due to atomic and molecular
energy levels of nitrogen,
whereas green, yellow, orange
colours are due to oxygen
(aurora © Jan Curtis)
Lightning, arcs, sparks,
coloured fireworks, most
coloured flames, some
electroluminescence
Colour lines are due to energy
levels of highly excited atoms
(flames of K, Cu, Cs, B, Ca
© Philip Evans)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
1628 colours and more
TABLE 7 Causes of colour (continued).
C o l o u r t y p e E x a m pl e D eta i l s
3. Vibrations and rotations of molecules
Bluish water, blue ice when
clear, violet iodine,
red-brown bromine,
yellow-green chlorine, red
flames from CN or
blue-green flames from
CH, some gas lasers, blue
ozone leading to blue and
gray evening sky
Colours are due to quantized
levels of rotation and
vibrations in molecules (blue
iceberg © Marc Shandro)
Class II: Colours due to ligand field effects
4. Transition metal compounds
Green malachite
Cu2CO3(OH)2, blue cobalt
oxide, blue azurite
Cu3(CO3)2(OH)2, red to
brown hematite Fe2O3,
green MnO, white
Mn(OH)2, brown
manganite, chrome green
Cr2O3, green
praesodymium, pink
europium and yellow
samarium compounds,
piezochromic and
thermochromic
Cr2O3 − Al2O3 UV and
electron phosphors,
scintillation, some
fluorescence, some lasers
Colours are due to electronic
states of the ions; phosphors
are used in cathodes tubes for
TV/computer displays and on
fluorescent lamp tubes (green
malachite on yellow kasolite, a
uranium mineral, picture
width 5mm, found in Kolwezi,
Zaire/Congo, © Stephan
Wolfsried, television shadow
mask photo © Planemad)
5. Transition metal impurities
Ruby, emerald, alexandrite,
perovskites, corresponding
lasers
Electronic states of transition
metal ions are excited by light
and thus absorb specific
wavelengths (ruby on calcite
from Mogok, Myanmar,
picture width 3 cm, © Rob
Lavinsky)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
8 colours and more 163
TABLE 7 Causes of colour (continued).
C o l o u r t y p e E x a m pl e D eta i l s
Class III: Colours due to molecular orbitals
6. Organic compounds
Red haemoglobin in blood,
blue blood haemocyanin,
green chlorophyll in plants,
yellow or orange carotenes
in carrots, flowers and
yellow autumn leaves, red
or purple anthocyanins in
berries, flowers and red
autumn leaves, blue indigo,
red lycopene in tomatoes,
red meat from
iron-containing myoglobin,
brown glucosamine in
crust of baked food, brown
tannins, black eumelanin
in human skin, hair and
eye, iron-rich variation
pheomelanin in redheads,
black melanin also in cut
apples and bananas as well
as in movable sacks in
chameleons, brown-black
asphalt, some fluorescence,
chemiluminescence,
phosphorescence,
halochromism,
electrochromism and
thermochromism, dye
lasers
Colours are due to conjugated
π-bonds, i.e. to alternating
single and double bonds in
molecules; floral pigments are
almost all anthocyanins,
betalains or carotenes; used in
colourants for foods and
cosmetics, in textile dyes, in
electrochromic displays, in
inks for colour printers, in
photosensitizers (narcissus
©Thomas Lüthi, blood on
finger © Ian Humes, berries
© NathanWall, hair courtesy
dusdin)
Glow-worms, some
bacteria and funghi, most
deep-sea fish, octopi,
jellyfish, and other
deep-sea animals
Bioluminescence is due to
excited molecules, generally
called luciferines (angler fish,
length 4.5 cm, © Steve
Haddock)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
164 8 colours and more
TABLE 7 Causes of colour (continued).
C o l o u r t y p e E x a m pl e D eta i l s
7. Inorganic charge transfer
Blue sapphire, blue lapis
lazuli, green amazonite,
brown-black magnetite
Fe3O4 and most other iron
minerals (colouring basalt
black, beer bottles brown,
quartz sand yellow, and
many other rocks with
brown or red tones), black
graphite, purple
permanganate, orange
potassium dichromate,
yellow molybdates, red
hematite Fe2O3, some
fluorescence
Light induces change of
position of an electron from
one atom to another; for
example, in blue sapphire the
transition is between Ti and
Fe impurities; many paint
pigments use charge transfer
colours; fluorescent analytical
reagents are used in molecular
medicine and biology
(magnetite found in Laach,
Germany, picture width
10mm, © StephanWolfsried,
sand desert Evelien
Willemsen)
Class IV: Colours due to energy band effects
8. Metallic bands
Gold (green in
transmission), pyrite, iron,
brass, alloys, silver, copper,
ruby glass
Colours in reflection and in
transmission are due to
transitions of electrons
between overlapping bands
(saxophone © Selmer)
9. Pure semiconductor bands
Silicon, GaAs, black galena
PbS, red cinnabar HgS,
cadmium yellow CdS,
black CdSe, red CdSxSe1−x,
white ZnO, orange
vermillion HgS, colourless
diamond, black to gold
piezochromic SmS
Colours are due to electron
transitions between separate
bands; colour series is black,
red, orange, yellow,
white/colourless; some used
as pigments (zinc oxide
courtesyWalkerma)
10. Doped semiconductor bands
Blue, yellow, green and
black diamond; LEDs;
semiconductor lasers; solar
cells; ZnS and ZnxCd1−xS
based and other phosphors
Colours are due to transitions
between dopants and
semiconductor bands
(e.g. blue diamond: boron
accepters, black diamond:
nitrogen donors) (quantum
dots © Andrey Rogach)
Motion Mountain – The Adventure of Physics pdf file available free of charge at www.motionmountain.net Copyright © Christoph Schiller June 1990–May 2013
8 colours and more 165
TABLE 7 Causes of colour (continued).
C o l o u r t y p e E x a m pl e D eta i l s
11. Colour centres
Amethyst, smoky quartz,
fluorite, green diamonds,
blue, yellow and brown
topaz, brown salt, purple
colour of irradiated glass
containing Mn2+,
lyoluminescence, some
fluorescence, F-centre
lasers
Colours are due to colour
centres, i.e. to electrons or to
holes bound at crystal
vacancies; colour centres are
usually are created by
radiation (amethyst © Rob
Lavinsky)
Some light-dependent
sunglasses
The photochromic colouring
is due to colour centres
formed by the UV light of the
Sun
Class V: Colours due to physical and geometrical optics
12. Dispersive refraction and polarization
Cut diamond, cut zirconia,
halos and sun dogs formed
by ice crystals in the air
Spectral decomposition
(sparkle or ‘fire’ of gemstones)
is due to dispersion in crystals
(zirconia photo © Gregory
Phillips)
Rainbow Colours of primary and
secondary bow are due to
dispersion in water droplets
Green flash dispersion in the atmosphere
shifts the sun colours
13. Scattering
Blue sky, blue colouring of
distant mountains, red
sunset; colour
intensification by pollution;
blue quartz


